SIGNIFICANT OTHERS



PAN- FRIED DUCK ROLL

Essentially this is a kind of ‘pulled’ duck confit, rolled up, sliced and pan-fried. Jeez, I’m so over the term ‘pulled’. In this instance, it’s a good way to describe what happens during the preparation process, but on the flip side, I’m now in danger of attracting hipsters, you know, those creative beardy types who can only eat local butter from a one-cow dairy, make eldercurrant drinks from their own piss and of course almost choke to death when they find out their ‘aged jus burger’ hasn’t been made from ‘pulled meat’ – back to your cycle cafés to sip your cold brew!

Back to the duck rolls… let’s say that the flesh of our confit is ‘shredded’; let’s get in fast with this one, before our hippy-hipster mates turn that into an annoying word too.

SERVES 2, AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

2 duck legs

½ recipe bacon cure

2 litres duck fat

5cm piece kombu

3cm piece ginger, sliced

a few generous shakes of sansho pepper

potato starch, for dusting

grapeseed oil, for frying

a handful of unsalted cashew nuts, deep-fried untill golden, to garnish

ponzu sauce , to serve, optional

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Rub the bacon cure into the duck legs, making sure you rub it all over. Cover and refrigerate for 12 hours. Rinse off the cure and pat the legs dry with kitchen paper.

Heat the duck fat in an ovenproof pan to 85°C and preheat your oven to this temperature too (85°C/65°C fan/Gas Mark low). Add the kombu and ginger slices to the pan and when the oil reaches temperature, carefully put in the cured duck legs and cover with foil. Cook in the oven for 12 hours. (You could also use a sous vide machine, should you have one.)

After 12 hours, remove the pan from the oven and allow the duck legs to cool in the fat.

Slip on some rubber food prep gloves and lift the confit legs from the fat. Shred – don’t pull – the meat away from the bones, discarding all the bones and mysterious tough bits. Shred the meat fibres as finely as you think you can, and season with the sansho pepper and a pinch of salt and black pepper. Drop 4–5 tablespoons of the duck fat into the shredded meat and mix thoroughly.

Lay out some clingfilm on the worktop and divide the meat into 3 even sausage-like shapes, then wrap them, one by one, as tightly as you can, still in the sausage shapes, about 2½–3cm round. Tie each end of the clingfilm. I’m putting emphasis on keeping it tight here – tight, tight, tight.

Get your 3 duck rolls in the fridge and chill for a good 5–6 hours.

Whilst still in clingfilm, cut the rolls into 5 slices, or if you fancy them a little smaller go for 6 per roll. Remove the clingfilm from each slice and dust the slices in potato starch.

Next, heat a decent puddle of grapeseed oil in the pan. Add the duck roll slices, and fry over a medium-high heat for 2 minutes on each side, until mildly crunchy.

Arrange the duck roll slices on your serving plate, garnish with some crushed fried cashews and serve with some ponzu sauce on the side if you like. You’re ready to rock and roll, oooh yeah!



Pan-Fried Duck Roll

BUTA NO KAKUNI WITH JAPANESE MUSTARD

This bad boy is a classic Japanese nimono dish. Nimomo is one of the many categories of Japanese cooking and takes in all simmered dishes. This particular dish comes from Nagasaki, apparently one of the only ports open to foreign trade for 250 years. It is also one of the first places that meat dishes began to appear after Buddhism forbade the slaughter of four-legged animals.

I’ve seen various different versions of this dish. The common theme of course is the pork – it’s always cooked very slowly and is, most of the time, really soft. And it’s always served with mustard. The most interesting version I encountered came with a kind of congee (rice porridge). I’m a massive fan of congee so I fell for it immediately. Another version I’ve seen, actually this time in a Japanese cookery magazine, presented it with a soft-boiled egg. I can’t really eat the egg due to hating raw yolks, but jeez, it looked pretty awesome. Here I’ve cooked both versions. It’s all so soft and silky, so rich and so moreish. If I get to the stage where all my teeth fall out and I have to be fed soft goo, then I’d pray it was this, maybe minus the egg. Presumably I’d still be able to talk so I should be okay…

SERVES 6

600g pork belly, cut into 2cm-thick strips

For the pork marinade

800ml dashi

250ml sake

50ml mirin

100ml dark soy sauce

80g soft light brown sugar

8cm piece kombu

For the congee

200g sushi rice, unwashed

6cm piece kombu

4cm knob of ginger, sliced

6 grilled/roasted chicken wings

5 teaspoons light soy sauce

2 teaspoons roasted sesame oil

a large pinch of sea salt, to season

a pinch of ground white pepper, to season

For the soft eggs

6 eggs

To serve

a handful of chopped spring onions

S&B Japanese mustard, or rehydrate English mustard powder with a little water

Preheat the oven to 110°C/90°C fan/Gas Mark ¼.

Mix all the ingredients for the pork marinade together until the sugar dissolves. Next, place the pork in a large flameproof casserole, and pour over the marinade. Cover with a lid or foil, and set in the oven to cook for 7 hours – it’s a long time but well worth it. Remove the casserole from the oven and allow the pork to cool in its liquid.

To make the congee, simmer the rice, 2 litres of water, kombu, ginger and chicken wings for 45 minutes to 1 hour (the timing will depend on how old the rice is), until soft and porridge-like. The congee will require continuous stirring and may need topping up with more water to prevent over-thickening.

To make the soft eggs, bring a pan of water to 63˚C/145°F (use a thermometer), and carefully drop in your eggs. Cook for 45 minutes at a steady temperature and you’ll have a perfectly cooked, runny yolk. If the temperature is creeping higher than the magic 63˚C/145°F, throw in a couple of ice cubes. The beauty of this method is that you won’t need to peel the egg – just give it a tap and pull the shell apart, your perfect egg will gently drop out.

Use a perforated spoon to remove the kombu, ginger and chicken wings from the congee. Season with the soy sauce, sesame oil, salt and pepper.

To serve, plate up 2 lengths of pork per person, add a decent dollop of the congee and top with an egg. Finish off with some chopped spring onion and a little pork cooking liquid (warmed up) and of course a dollop of S&B Japanese mustard – you can’t eat it without this!

Enjoy, piggies!



Buta No Kakuni with Japanese Mustard

MARBOU DOFU

This little cracker hails from the Sichuan province of China. Just like dozens of other food and culture influences, marbou dofu (aka mapo doufu or mapo tofu) has made its way into Japanese cuisine. Essentially, this is a one-pot dish of pork or beef mince with tofu, which has a rich fermented bean paste flavour and a warming chilli buzz. I’ve tried two main versions in Japan: marbou dofu (with tofu) and marbou nasu (with aubergine). When I first started to mess about with a recipe that I could serve at Kurobuta I couldn’t decide between the nasu and tofu versions, so I added both.

This really is a killer comfort food dish if served on steaming hot rice. I wasn’t brought up on it, but it reminds me a bit of my mum’s ‘mince on toast’. I serve it in lettuce cups at Kurobuta so it’s lighter.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

1 large purple aubergine, peeled and cut into large-ish 2.5cm chunks

20g ginger, finely grated or chopped

20g garlic, finely grated or chopped

20g spring onion, chopped

100g minced pork, from the shoulder

10g tobanjan (chilli bean paste)

10g gochujang (fermented chilli paste)

20g red miso paste

5 teaspoons mirin

50ml Chinese rice wine

150ml chicken stock

1 tablespoon cornflour, mixed with 1 tablespoon water to make a paste

4 teaspoons roasted sesame oil

2 tablespoons Japanese black vinegar

150g crumbled medium-firm tofu

1 tablespoon soft brown sugar

To serve

iceberg lettuce cups, optional

steamy hot rice, optional

First, heat the oil in your fryer (or large pan) to 180°C/350°F. Add the aubergine chunks, in batches if necessary, and deep-fry until golden. Drain well and set aside.

Sauté the ginger, garlic and spring onion over a medium heat until light brown in colour. Add the pork and tobanjan and brown the mince until cooked through. Add the gochujang, red miso, mirin and rice wine and cook for 2 minutes. Add the chicken stock and golden fried aubergine, then bring to the boil. Quickly stir in the cornflour-water mix and stir well until thoroughly incorporated. Simmer for 1 minute.

Remove from the heat and stir in the sesame oil, black vinegar and tofu. Gently stir in the sugar.

Serve warm with ice-cold crunchy iceberg lettuce cups, or on steamy hot rice if you fancy.



Marbou Dofu

SOBA RISOTTO WITH BARLEY MISO GRILLED SALMON BELLY

I’m calling this a risotto because I think it’s the easiest way to describe how this dish takes shape. It’s actually far wetter than your average risotto.

You’ll no doubt be familiar with soba noodles, which are produced by first milling the grain soba-ko (buckwheat) to flour, which is then mixed with wheat flour, water and salt to make up a dough. The next few steps are really interesting: the dough is rolled out with what looks like a street fighter’s weapon. Once it’s shaped correctly yet another weapon of a tool is unleashed – a giant square-shaped knife. (You should look it up, this bad boy is seriously dangerous!) Don’t mess with any angry soba chef. Anyhow, these soba grains, before the soba noodle dudes wind up with them and mill them to flour, make an excellent risotto-like dish. I make this with mushrooms or whatever green veg is in season – asparagus, broad beans, peas, etc.

If you struggle in your search for moro miso (barley miso), then you can go for a classic shio-yaki version whereby the skin side of the salmon receives a liberal sprinkling of fine salt before it’s grilled. Note, moro miso differs from your basic soybean miso, which is easy to source, but I wouldn’t recommend using soybean miso as a substitute.

I use Japanese soba grains here but you can substitute them with European buckwheat grains – after all, soba is Japanese for buckwheat.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF MULTI-COURSE MENU

1 x 180g salmon belly, skin on, bones removed

50g moro miso (barley miso)

light olive oil, for brushing

For the risotto

90g soba grains (or buckwheat grains)

40g salted butter

2 garlic cloves, thinly sliced

30g mixed Japanese mushrooms – shimeji, shiitake, eryngii – thinly sliced

2 asparagus stalks, sliced into rounds, or 30g freshly blanched peas, or whatever is peaking in season green-veg wise

50ml sake

50ml mirin

50ml dark soy sauce

120ml dashi

10g cornflour, mixed with 1–2 tablespoons cold water to form a paste

To serve

1 tablespoon chives, chopped, optional

a few drops of truffle oil, optional

Equipment

3 long (18cm) bamboo skewers, pre-soaked in cold water for 1 hour

First prepare the salmon. Rub the salmon with the miso and marinate for a good 6–8 hours.

Put the soba grains in a pan with cold water to cover and bring to the boil. Simmer for about 6–7 minutes until the grains are tender. Drain and set aside.

Melt 30g of the butter in a pan. Add the garlic and sauté until soft, uncovered, over a medium heat for 2–3 minutes. Add the mushrooms and asparagus (or other green veg) and sauté for 2–3 minutes, until soft. Add the sake, mirin, soy sauce and dashi, and then add the pre-cooked soba grains and bring to the boil. Whisk in the cornflour-water mix and simmer for about 45 seconds.

Keep the risotto warm while you grill the salmon.

Remove the salmon from the marinade and poke the soaked skewers into it at even intervals along the long side of the salmon. (Each end piece needs to angle to a central point so that you can hold it with one hand.)

Place a grill rack over really hot, glowing charcoal. Lightly oil the marinated salmon and then place it on the rack, skin-side down. Grill for 3–4 minutes or until the skin becomes crunchy. Flip it over and cook for a further 2–3 minutes.

Just before serving, stir the remaining 10g of butter into the risotto and, if using, finish with the chives and/or a few drops of truffle oil. To serve, spoon the soba risotto into a bowl and place the salmon right on top.

Go for gold!



Soba Risotto with Barley Miso Grilled Salmon Belly

BFF - UNAGI AND FOIE GRAS WITH APPLE BALSAMIC

These two fuckers absolutely belong together. It may seem a bit like shooting fish in a barrel, two great, tasty ingredients together for a cheffy show-off extravaganza. And that would be fair enough, I suppose it is a bit like that, but to me this is an example of how the east and the west meld seamlessly. Foie gras has been used in Japan since they began importing it, circa mid-1960s, so although it’s not something we view as typically Japanese, it’s been kicking around for a while. I’m sure I’m not the only one who’s served up this killer combo. It’s probably been done to death somewhere in Japan but I haven’t seen it so I feel like I can take some credit for this.

My thoughts on foie gras: it’s had some really bad press and deservedly so. However, in the wild, geese and ducks instinctively smash a shit-ton of food ahead of their migrating journey south for the winter. They smash it so hard that their livers wind up the lovely fatty thing we call foie gras. I will never buy shitty foie gras that’s been reared poorly or treated badly. Instead, I buy from ethical producers, such as the ones that I’ve visited in France that let their ducks and geese roam free for most of their lives.

Try to marinate your foie gras in den miso one day ahead of whatever dish you’re making, as it adds a sweetness and umami kick that no proud Michelin starred fancy pants cook has ever served me. You’ll need about 30ml for the amount of foie gras below.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

35–40g foie gras

30ml den miso , optional (see introduction above)

150g unagi kabayaki (sweet grilled eel, available from Japanese shops), cut into 6 even pieces

30ml unagi sauce

grapeseed oil, for frying

For the apple balsamic

150ml balsamic vinegar (doesn’t have to be top-grade balsamic)

200ml apple juice

1 Granny Smith apple, cut into 6 wedges

To serve

½ Granny Smith apple

puffed soba

pickled grapes

If you have time (and want to impress), marinate your foie gras in the den miso the day before you want to serve.

To make the apple balsamic, simmer all the ingredients in a pan for 20–25 minutes over a medium heat. Allow to cool, strain, then set aside.

Heat a salamander (top heat grill) or ordinary grill. Brush the unagi pieces with half the unagi sauce and cook under the salamander, until well caramelised. Brush with the other half of the sauce during grilling.

Next, heat a non-stick pan over a high heat and add a few drops of grapeseed oil.

Wipe the den miso (if used) from the foie gras, and add to the pan. Cook over a high heat and allow the foie gras to colour well, and then flip over. Brown well on the other side, too. Remove from the pan and set aside in a warm place (near a hot stove is perfect) to soften up.

Arrange the foie gras and unagi overlapping on a plate, lunch box or whatever you think is funky, and drizzle with the apple balsamic. Grate your Granny Smith apple, skin on, and make a mound of it on the side of the plate. Finally sprinkle with the puffed soba and drop some gari (pickled grapes), on the side as a refresher, once you’re done.

Get down!



BFF - Unagi and Foie Gras with Apple Balsamic

MOUNTAIN POTATO BUNS WITH MISO YAKI RABBIT

You don’t often see rabbit feature in Japanese cuisine, hardly ever I’d say, if not never. When my mate Mike (Morton) Brown and I opened our pan-Asian joint in France, nearly a million years ago now, we featured a Thai green curry of rabbit. The Frenchies nearly shat themselves – Bah, no, you cannot! I fucking can, and you’re gonna love it – and they did. Blinkers off, Frenchies! It takes a naive 25-year-old Aussie backpacker to rudely upset the comfortable and well-established Savoie region’s restaurant scene. Anyway, after France it was London for me and I still had a hankering for the rabbit. Here is what I began to play around with…

SERVES 4

For the mountain potato bread

2 medium-sized potatoes (anything that’s good for mashing), peeled and cut into 3–4cm chunks

150g yama imo root (sticky mountain potato), grated (this can be hard to find, but you can normally source it pre-grated and frozen from Japanese shops or online, and then it’s called tororo)

1 teaspoon sea salt

20g salted butter, softened

100g plain flour, plus extra to dust

80g clarified butter

For the rabbit

300ml den miso

2 green chillies, roughly chopped

1 whole rabbit, gutted and cute fluffy tail removed

2 litres dashi

5cm piece kombu

For the chilli-miso-truffle sauce

50ml den miso

2 handfuls of frozen spinach

1 medium chilli, roughly chopped

4 teaspoons Japanese rice vinegar

truffle oil, to taste

To prepare the rabbit, combined the miso and chillies, and spread all over the rabbit. Cover and leave to marinate in the fridge for 24 hours.

Fire up the barbie and barbecue the rabbit until well-coloured. (You do this to impart some barbecue-flavour into the rabbit not to cook it.)

Heat the oven to 190°C/170°C fan/Gas Mark 5. Put the whole rabbit in a deep ovenproof dish, pour over the dashi, adding the kombu too. Cover with foil and cook in the oven for 40 minutes.

Handpick the meat from the rabbit bones and get hipster with it (meaning, you’re making pulled rabbit). Mix about 90ml of the liquid from the dish with the meat and chill, covered, until needed.

Meanwhile, make the chilli-miso-truffle sauce. Blend all the ingredients vigorously until fine, and then pass through a muslin-lined sieve and set aside until needed.

To make the bread, first cook the potatoes in a pan of boiling water for about 20 minutes, or until soft. Drain well and then mash. Stir in the grated yamo imo and mix well. Stir in the salt and butter, then finally fold in the flour until well incorporated.

Turn out onto a floured surface and knead for 5 minutes, until a tight, elastic dough forms. Wrap the dough in clingfilm and rest for a minimum of 1 hour.

When ready to use, roll the dough out into a log about 4–5cm in diameter. Cut off 35–40g chunks and roll out again to make 2cm-thick discs.

Heat the clarified butter in a non-stick frying pan and pan-fry the bread discs over a medium-low heat for 4 minutes on each side, until golden all over.

Now you’re ready to build your rabbit sandwiches.

Place a 50–60g dollop of the chilled ‘pulled’ rabbit on one of the mountain potato breads, sandwich it with another bread and press down. Cut into quarters and serve one sandwich per person, drizzled with chilli-miso-truffle sauce.



Mountain Potato Buns with Miso Yaki Rabbit

BUTTER FRIED DOVER SOLE WITH SPICY SHISO PONZU

I can’t avoid a well-cooked Dover sole. Sole meunière is one of my favourite dishes ever. It’s unavoidable for me, that rich, nutty butter, the texture, the odd caper or two – it’s last meal stuff. This dish came about when I was sweating it out on the line at Nobu in Park Lane. Drew Nierporent, legendary New York restaurateur and Nobu partner, had just landed in town and as usual came in to say hi. He asked me to take care of his menu but he wanted Dover sole. I thought, in the heat of it (we used to rock 400/500 covers for dinner back then) he must be feeling like sole meunière – fuck, I would be – and this is going to be my starting point. I jazzed it up with a salsa that I’d been tinkering with, something fresh, zesty with a hint of chilli and a double whack of shiso to steer it back towards something Japanese-y. It worked, it fucking worked! It was one of those moments when you know you’ve nailed it. It went onto be a special, then on to the menu, even Nobu-san had a crack at making it for one of his books.

The sauce also works with steamed green veg, with langoustines hot off the barbie, or as a dip for salmon sashimi or whatever else you have – it’s the ‘cheat’ sauce.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU (BUT I COULD EASILY EAT ONE OF THESE ON MY OWN)

1 skinless Dover sole, approx. 400g or so

1 litre rapeseed oil for deep-frying

1 tablespoon grapeseed oil,

20g plain flour

60g best-quality salted butter, diced into 1cm × 1cm chunks

spicy shiso ponzu

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

It’s a total joy to fillet a Dover sole as it’s a flat fish and has 4 fillets, 2 on the top and 2 on the underside. Once the skin is off you’ll see the layout much more clearly. Run the knife down the centre and, pressing the knife against the bone, work the fillet away in smooth, longish swipes of the knife. (You can check out YouTube for videos on how to do this.) Do this for each fillet. Obviously, you could ask your fish bloke to do it for you too!

Keep the bone – it’s tasty and crunchy. Cut away the head and whack the bone straight into the fryer and deep-fry it at 180°C/350°F until it’s golden. Remove and drain on kitchen paper. Set aside.

When you’re nearly ready to serve, heat a non-stick frying pan over a medium heat and add 1 tablespoon of grapeseed oil. Lightly season the sole fillets with salt and pepper on both sides. Now, run the fillets through the flour, coat well, then shake off any excess flour.

The fillets will appear to have a convex or outwardly curved side; place this into the pan, one piece at a time. Give the pan a gentle shake to ensure no sticking is going down. After about 1½ minutes, add the chunks of butter, spreading them evenly around the pan and giving the pan some more shaking action. Cook for 40–50 seconds. Your fish should start taking on a sexy golden colour; if it hasn’t you could raise the heat a little or wait a bit longer.

So, once it’s golden, turn off the heat, flip the fish over and give it a last little shake around. Allow the fillets to rest for 30 seconds and let the residual heat finish gently cooking the underside.

Plate ’em up and drizzle your sauce over. Make sure that you don’t forget to include the crunchy bone – break it into pieces to make it easier to share. (Be careful though, a bone is still a bone and you’ll need to watch out.)



Butter Fried Dover Sole with Spicy Shiso Ponzu

BBQ SKATE WITH WARM SOBA VINAIGRETTE

You could use this warm vinaigrette for almost any pan-fried fish dish. It might be OK with lighter meats, and possibly works with vegetable preparations – check it out. Vinaigrette is obviously a French word for dressing. I was taught about warm vinaigrettes as an apprentice by a shit-mad Frenchman. He was as mad as a box of frogs, from ‘practising’ his martial art moves on us, to private beatings in the walk-in cool room, to verbal lashings that would leave poor old Gordon looking like something from a Mardi Gras parade. But this fucker could cook. He had zero social or people skills, but he could cook, and that’s why we all hung around.

Back to the fish… I first tried skate in London many years ago. The texture was like nothing we had where I came from, nothing like the frozen and supposedly ‘fresh’ things that those clueless suppliers would deliver to us apprentices. I ordered skate as often as I was allowed to do a special and I’d work out exactly how it behaved when subjected to various marinating and cooking methods. Barbecuing over hot coals (on sticks) is pretty awesome, but this comes second to pan-frying with butter. Yeah, yeah, it’s not Japanese, but I’m not looking for an opinion here – I’m telling you this combination is a winner.

The vinaigrette needs to be made right before serving, it can go from excellent to what looks like the scrap bucket in minutes, so focus and serve it up fresh, fresh, fresh.

SERVES 2–4

50ml light olive oil

1 small-medium sized skate wing, approx. 400g

60g whole salted butter, diced

½ lemon, for squeezing

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

For the warm soba vinaigrette

25ml extra virgin olive oil

20g red onion, diced

1 garlic clove, finely chopped

25ml red wine vinegar

1 heaped teaspoon Dijon mustard

20g cooked soba grains (if you can’t locate Japanese soba, which is buckwheat, then Western grains will do, less tasty, but will do)

1 large ripe tomato, skin removed, deseeded and diced

25ml lemon juice

10g cooked hijiki

1 tablespoon chopped chives

Heat a non-stick pan until it’s pretty hot and add the oil. Season the skate well with salt and pepper and then pan-fry over a medium-high heat until golden on one side – 2 minutes should do, maybe a little more. Add all of the butter, shake it like one of those old pictures, do a little dance, then flip it over.

The butter will be foaming and becoming nutty by now. Lower the heat and carry on cooking the underside of the fish for 3 minutes. Give the flesh a little poke with a sharp knife – at the fattest end you’ll need the flesh to easily break away from the bone. Once you’re there, squeeze over the lemon, swirl the juice about and then transfer to a warm plate, pouring every last drop of the pan liquids over the top. Keep in a warm place while you make the vinaigrette.

In a small pan, gently heat the oil and add the garlic and onion. Don’t colour them, just gently warm through. Next, add the vinegar and mustard and, using a tablespoon, move everything about until well mixed.

Add the soba, tomato, lemon juice, hijiki and chives, toss quickly and then remove from the heat.

Season the vinaigrette with salt and pepper and stir in a couple of tablespoons of the cooking juices (butter ’n’ stuff). Pour this over the skate and get into it immediately.



BBQ Skate with Warm Soba Vinaigrette

OKONOMIYAKI – KUROBUTA STYLE

I’m not fucking with this too much. I’ll keep it as simple and as classic as I can – and sometimes I can’t!

Okonomiyaki is a classic dish served in okonomiyaki restaurants and sometimes by street vendors in Japan. It is often referred to as a cabbage pancake but this might be doing it an injustice. Usually the fillings are cooked into the batter, but I like to keep them separate and mix and match as I go. Check it.

MAKES 1

For the batter

100g okonomiyaki flour

160ml dashi

2 eggs

300g soft cabbage (like hispi), shredded, or use kimchi pickle

2 spring onions, chopped

3 rashers streaky bacon, optional

To serve

Japanese Kewpie mayonnaise, to taste

okonomiyaki or tonkatsu sauce (both need to be in squeezy bottles)

1 tablespoon tempura crunchies

1 medium-sized cooked octopus tentacle, grilled

a large pinch of katsuobushi (bonito flakes)

I use a small square pan (AKA tamago pan) to cook this, but any pan will do. Put the pan over a medium heat and lightly coat the base of the pan with a little oil.

Make the batter. Whisk together the flour, dashi and eggs. Ladle in enough batter to come up to 2cm of the hot pan and top with a mound of cabbage/kimchi and spring onion (if you’re using streaky bacon add it at this stage too), then pour over the remaining batter. Allow the okonomiyaki to cook over a medium heat for 12–15 minutes, or until cooked through and nicely golden at the base. Flip it over, and carry on cooking until the remaining side is golden.

Slide the okonomiyaki onto a chopping board and chop into easy-to-manage-with-chopsticks strips and plate up. Drizzle over the mayo and okonomiyaki or tonkatsu sauce, and then mound the rest of your garnishes either right on top or to the side. Dig in!



Okonomiyaki – Kurobuta Style

CRISPY SKIN DUCK IN WATERMELON AND PEANUT SOY

Essentially this is confit duck, which has been given a crunchy skin right before chopping up and serving. When watermelon is in prime condition you can chop it up and there’s nothing else to do but in the UK we have an inconsistent watermelon supply, even when it’s meant to be in season. Trick: take an average watermelon slice 2–3cm thick and whack it into a vacuum bag, pour in some umeshu (plum) and compress it. This process firms and sweetens it up and it’s what I tend to do.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

For the confit duck

1 litre duck fat

1 duck leg, cured for 24 hours in 200g bacon cure

6cm piece kombu

For the peanut soy

200g unsalted roasted peanuts

250ml kecap manis

1–2 dried chillies (depending on taste!), finely chopped

To serve

1 teaspoon chopped yuzu zest

4–6 cubes of watermelon (compressed as per suggestion in the intro above if needed)

a pinch of white sesame seeds

mizuna leaves, optional

First, make the confit duck. Preheat the oven to 110°C/90°C fan/Gas Mark ¼. Pour the fat into a casserole dish and submerge the duck in the fat, skin-side up, then add the kombu. Cover, and cook for 7 hours – I think you can watch the best part of a season of Breaking Bad in that time.

Check the duck is tender and falls away easily from the bone. If so, it’s done. Allow to completely cool in the fat. When cool, gently remove the bone and the flesh from the fat and chill for at least 1 hour before reheating. If you want to make more confit duck the fat can be reused.

To reheat the duck, put the duck skin-side down in a cold non-stick pan. Set over a medium-high heat and allow the duck to gently crisp up for 8 minutes or so. Turn over and warm through and then take the pan off the heat.

To make the peanut soy, simply combine all the ingredients together and serve as required.

To serve, arrange neatly on the plate with the peanut soy on the side, but you could easily toss it all in a bowl, maybe even with some super-fresh mizuna leaves, and you’re good to go.



Crispy Skin Duck in Watermelon and Peanut Soy

TAKIKOMI GOHAN WITH CRAB (RICE HOT POT)

This is a generic name for a rice hot pot. I remember a Japanese chef once telling me that this dish was ‘something with rice’. I thought he was joking. I was asking, something, what? What do you mean, what do I put with it? He just kept repeating that it was something with rice. It was beginning to piss me off a bit, what the fuck did he want me to put with this fucking thing? He just really wanted to say that I could pretty much put whatever I liked in it. Over the years I’ve had killer versions, loading it with roast pumpkin and soba, finishing it with puréed spinach, topping with sea bass or piling it with truffles. It’s a no brainer but my favourite is with crab. Fill ’er up!

You’re almost making a risotto here, but I like to keep it fairly wet, almost soupy.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

20ml light olive oil

2 garlic cloves, peeled and thinly sliced

40g mixed Japanese mushrooms

100g sushi rice (washed well until the water runs clear – you can keep the milk water that first runs off for cooking daikon chunks)

30ml sake

80ml dashi

60g cooked crabmeat (king crab is great but use whatever is available)

1 tablespoon finely chopped chives

35g whole salted butter, diced

25g combination of something green – peas, edamame, broad beans etc.

For the takikomi liquor (makes a little more than needed for this recipe)

240ml dashi

25ml mirin

25ml light soy sauce

25ml dark soy sauce

5cm piece kombu

1 teaspoon sea salt

To garnish

a sprinkling of white sesame seeds

a tiny sprinkling of chopped yuzu zest (or lemon will do)

1 sudachi or 1 small lime

First make the takikomi liquor. Mix all the ingredients together in a pan and warm gently to dissolve the salt – do not let it boil. Once the salt has dissolved, take off the heat and leave to cool. Refrigerate until needed.

Heat the oil in a pan over a medium-high heat. Add the garlic slices and cook to soften the garlic without colouring. Next, add the mushrooms and rice, and turn up the heat slightly. Cook for another 5 minutes, until the mushrooms are beginning to soften. Add the sake and stir well to deglaze any bits that have caramelised and stuck to the bottom of the pan.

Add 200ml of the takikomi liquor and stir well. Continue to cook, over a medium heat, stirring from time to time, for 20 minutes until thickened. Add some dashi, a good few splashes at time. Depending on how old your rice is (drier equals more liquid and longer cooking time), the rice ought to be done in around 18 minutes. If your rice has thickened up too much but is not cooked through add a little more dashi and takikomi liquor to taste, bearing in mind that as the liquor cooks out it can become quite strong.

So, the result should be a wet risotto. If you have this, then let’s proceed…

(If you want to prepare this ahead of time, you can spread the cooked rice base over a flat tray, cover with clingfilm and leave to one side for a few hours. Heat it later on with a little extra (about 50ml) dashi – it will have soaked up all the excess liquid by then. But just don’t store it in the fridge.)

So, when you’re ready, remove the pan from the heat, add your crabmeat, chives, diced butter and green veg. Stir well to warm through.

Pour into 2 individual bowls, or if sharing is your thing, 1 biggie. Scatter some sesame seeds and yuzu zest over the top. It’s great with some fresh sudachi (little lime-like Japanese citrus fruit) squirted over right before eating (or use lime if you can’t get sudachi).

If you want to give it some kick, try drizzling over some chilli oil, or a 1:1 soy and mirin mix with some chilli flakes and chopped spring onion is a pretty decadent condiment.

Eat now!



Takikomi Gohan with Crab (Rice Hot Pot)

LOBSTER AND CHIPS

Lobsters used to be posh. They can still be fairly expensive little buggers, but times have changed. Dressing up in your best gut-hugging suit coat, sitting nicely and eating it politely in front of monkey nailers isn’t how you’ll see lobsters being devoured these days. Lobsters have gone street, they show up in food trucks, pop-ups, and burger joints, and hipsters on bicycles serve them in vintage saxophones with wangberry chutney…

I fucking love chips too – who isn’t partial to the lengthy array of chips, crisps, triple-cooked chips, skinny fries and all the rest? You could use whatever you like that’s in season to make the chips – for example, Jerusalem artichoke, parsnip or sweet potato. I love beet chips – look out for the red, the golden and the candy cane.

It’s a far cry from Japan but this yuzu egg sauce and my kombu-soy-butter cooking process inject the dish with a whole load of Japanese umami. Use whatever root veg you like to make your chips as well as some skinny potato fries. I cook the lobster sous vide style, you can get away with a pan, a low flame or hob and some babysitting.

SERVES 2

1 live lobster, approx. 450g

2 tablespoons light soy sauce

2cm piece kombu

20g good-quality salted butter

20ml sake

30g ginger, thinly sliced

2 spring onion lengths, mostly the white part

For the chips

½ root veg of choice (parsnip, beetroot, artichoke etc.)

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

½ potato (ask your local grower for the best potatoes for chips, you’ll need to change varieties throughout the year as they go in and out of season)

To serve

yuzu-truffle-egg sauce , omit the truffle, or not

finely chopped chives

Knock the lobster out by freezing it for a couple of hours, and then blanch it in boiling water for 2 minutes, then chill in iced water for 2 minutes. Remove the shell and cut the meat into pieces that would be easily managed with chopsticks (bite-sized chunks). Combine the lobster meat with the remaining ingredients.

Heat your sous vide machine to 56°C/130°F, whack the lobster and stuff into a vacuum bag or 2 zip-lock plastic bags and seal. Submerge into the water for 12 minutes – weigh it down if it’s a floater.

Peel and use a mandoline to thinly slice your veg of choice into rounds. Heat the oil in a fryer or large pan to 160°C/320°F, and fry until crunchy. They may not be 100 per cent crispy when you pull them out, but that’s fine. Put them on a tray lined with kitchen paper and into an oven at its lowest setting. After 1 hour they will be just right but keep them in the oven until you need them.

To make the chips, cut the potatoes into longish pieces, approximately 5–6cm long and 2mm thick. Wash, drain well and dry.

Heat the oil to 140°C/275°F and cook for 2 minutes until the chips are soft and soggy. Remove and drain well. Increase the heat to 180°C/350°F and drop your soggy chips in and cook until golden and crisp.

Once the lobster is cooked, cut open the bag, drain the juices, ginger and kombu, and plate the lobster with the chips and yuzu egg sauce in a pot on the side.

You could go total street vendor on your guests and serve this up in greaseproof paper, or risk a dirty newspaper. Scatter your warm, buttery, umami-rich lobster around your street-cred paper, scatter your chips about, then drizzle with your sauce and maybe some chopped chives if using.



Lobster and Chips

SMOKEY PORK GYOZA WITH SESAME DIP

Cured and tea-smoked pork neck is the killer filler for these little fuckers. Gyoza making is the one thing that used to get our chefs into fierce competition mode. The objective was to make as many tiny folds on the dumplings as neatly as possible. My whole thing was that the deep-frozen gyoza that you buy in the freezer section of Japanese grocers were imperfect, having only four or five folds. As skilful chefs we ought to be able to make it look much finer, so it was game on.

Plan ahead with this one. Your pork neck needs a solid 12 hours’ curing time. And I personally think you need to give the smoked meat an overnight spell in the fridge to let the astringent, strong, overly smoky flavour settle.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

8 gyoza skins (they come frozen in large packs, defrost only what you need and they’ll last for ages)

light olive oil, for frying

2 spring onions, chopped

½ red chilli, cut into chunks

2 splashes sesame oil

For the pork neck

200g pork neck

100g bacon cure

smoke mix

For the sesame dip

140g Japanese sesame paste (tahini is ok if you’re stuck and don’t mind it tasting like hippy ponzu sauce)

100ml ponzu sauce

35g caster sugar

2 splashes of roasted sesame oil

For the gyoza mix

2 lengths spring onions – green and white bits, chopped, washed and dried

1 teaspoon roasted sesame oil

1 teaspoon toasted white sesame seeds

1 teaspoon chilli-garlic paste

1½ teaspoons grated ginger

2½ teaspoons light soy sauce

1 egg

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

Wash your pork, drain and dry it. Rub thoroughly with the bacon cure, and pack it on. Refrigerate for 12 hours. Wash off the cure and drain well.

When ready to smoke, heat a wok or large pan and follow the directions here . Place the pork on a rack and place over the smoke, then cover well. Hot smoke for 4 minutes on each side.

Remove from the heat and set the pork aside to cool to room temperature. Place on a plate and cover with clingfilm, then refrigerate for a good 5 hours or more.

To make the dip simply blend the ingredients with 50ml of water until smooth and keep refrigerated until required.

When you’re ready to make the gyoza, mince the pork neck in a mincer (or chop by hand for a coarser texture and one hell of an aching hand). Slip on some food-safe gloves and massage the smoked pork neck with the rest of the gyoza mix ingredients until it’s all well combined. Take a small teaspoonful and pan-fry it to test the seasoning, Fry, eat, taste. Yum? No, adjust the seasoning as necessary. If it’s ok let’s carry on…

Make sure the pork mix is well chilled before and during the process, and when the gyoza skins are not required, keep them wrapped in a damp cloth or tea towel to stop them drying out.

Take a gyoza skin and place a good dollop (about 25g) of the chilled pork mix into the centre. Dip your finger into cold water and run it around the rim of the skin. Lift the gyoza in your left hand and, using your moist finger, spread the mixture evenly. Starting at the bottom left corner pinch the dough together, then continue to pull the dough closest to you over to the left, making small folds. Pinch each fold to seal it shut – 8–10 folds is cool. Be a maniac once you’ve nailed the technique and try to beat my 30-ish!

To cook the gyoza, heat a non-stick pan and lightly oil the base with light olive oil. Press the flat side of the gyoza into the hot pan and let it sizzle away over a medium-high heat for 2–3 minutes, until it becomes golden – lift at intervals to check.

At this stage, pour in enough water to come halfway up the gyoza (pan size and batch size will determine the exact quantity of water you need). Immediately cover with a lid and cook over a high heat, until the water evaporates. Remove the lid and allow the base to get crunchy again, another 30 seconds.

Toss in some chopped spring onions and chunks of red chilli along with a couple of splashes of sesame oil. Once the base has become crunchy again, quickly toss the gyozas, spring onion and chilli around the pan a couple of times then tip into your serving bowl. Serve ’em up with the sesame dip.



Smokey Pork Gyoza with Sesame Dip

CURRIED CONGEE WITH LANGOUSTINES

This is soul-enriching stuff. It is for any time of the day but often breakfast. It has a thousand possible toppings or seasonings and it’s a big gluggy bowl of extremely over-cooked rice!

I first encountered congee when I was 19. I was working in a hotel kitchen which would have inspired the producers of Ramsay’s Kitchen Nightmares to pack it in. Anyway, I bravely ate a big bowl of congee each day and not only survived to tell the tale, but also changed my breakfast routine forever.

This is less of a breakfast version, but you’d probably want to eat this as a light supper, or, if you’re like me, any time is congee time!

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

4 langoustines, shelled and deveined

a splash of dark soy sauce

a dash of sake

a dash of mirin

small knob of salted butter

For the red hot umami oil

80g dried red chilli flakes

2 garlic cloves

10g dried shrimp

5cm piece kombu

5cm length Parmesan rind

a small handful of katsuobushi (bonito flakes)

1 small red pepper, deseeded and cut into small dice approx. 2mm × 2mm

6 small red bird’s eye chillies

300ml light olive oil

60ml toasted sesame oil

For the curried congee

160g sushi rice

120g cauliflower, cut into small florettes

1½ tablespoons curry powder

6cm piece kombu

2–3cm piece ginger, halved

2 litres chicken stock

light soy sauce, to taste

roasted sesame oil, to taste

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper, to taste

To serve

pork scratchings , chopped

2 spring onions, chopped

2cm piece ginger, finely grated

First make the umami oil. Combine all the ingredients in a pan and cook over a low heat for 45 minutes. The oil should be at about 65°C/150°F. Allow to cool, and then refrigerate for a good 6 hours minimum. The next day, reheat the oil to approximately 40°C/100°F, then strain well. Decant into an airtight glass jar and refrigerate (it will last a good while!).

It’s pretty simple to make the curried congee; you want to overcook the rice until it becomes kind of like a stodgy porridge. To do this, whack the rice, cauliflower, curry powder, kombu, ginger and stock into a pot – bigger than you think you need. Get it over a high heat and bring to the boil. Reduce the heat to medium and cook for 30–40 minutes, stirring often as it burns easily. It will become really thick and there shouldn’t be any rice granules. You may need to add more stock or even water and continue to cook, covered, until the rice is totally broken down. Season with a dash of light soy sauce, roasted sesame oil and a bit of salt and pepper. It doesn’t need to be mega-seasoned now as you will be adding other elements to it, which will balance the flavour out.

For the langoustines, try to find whole, live ones. Google it – there will be some nut out there willing to ice them up and send them via FedEx. If not, scour the world for the best-quality langoustine meat. Again, fresh is best, frozen is death. This recipe is intended for use with vac bags, a vac pack machine and a water circulator – posh bugger, I hear you mutter, well that’s where you’re wrong. Here’s household botch job lesson number one. Those of you with all the fancy kit will know how to adapt this back to big-tall-hat-chef level; or will you?

First, fill a deep saucepan with water and heat to around 55°C/130°F. Next, get some zip-lock plastic bags and put one inside the other. Put your shelled and deveined langoustine tails into the inner bag; lay them flat, side by side, making sure they don’t overlap. Add the dark soy sauce, sake, mirin and the butter. Push as much air out of the bags as possible, then zip them up. Slide the bag into the warm water; you’ll need to weigh it down with a small brick or something else that’s far more suitable, like a plate. Leave the langoustines in the water for about 12 minutes if they are big plump ones. If they are scrawny little buggers, cook them for about 4 minutes.

Now you’re ready to roll. Give your congee one last taste to check that it is lightly seasoned. Pour the congee into a deep bowl. Top with the langoustines; keep the juices in the bag for later. Scatter the pork scratchings all around, along with the chopped spring onions and finely grated ginger. You may even want to add a drizzle of the langoustine cooking juices. Serve with a little red hot umami oil on the side, unless you’re a total nut and in that case whack it on and let the chilli madness take over your brain.



Curried Congee with Langoustines

DELUXE CHICKEN KATSU WITH CAFÉ DE PARIS BUTTER

Katsu cooking – you know it right? Panko crumbed and golden fried. Pork and chicken are the common ones, served with a plate of shredded cabbage, mustard, lemon steamed rice and tonkatsu sauce = brilliant! Another classic is katsu chopped up and served with a Japanese curry – dirty, but good dirty!

A pork katsu sando (sandwich) is probably my favourite though. I once ate this at a run of the mill, non-descript shopping arcade in Tokyo, it was blindingly good. It’s mad how something that is seemingly so simple can get you buzzing. So after that, my shopping mall-mecca-moment, I started to think about how I would like to serve ‘my’ katsu. Weirdness flowed, as it does, but the one thing that seemed plausible was Café de Paris butter. On a steak with fries it can put me into a trance. Death row shit – you bet.

So, here it is, chicken breast fried and served with butter. You thought Japanese food was all about purity? You thought wrong, guilty pleasures are universal!

SERVES 2 DIRTY BUGGERS

1 plump corn-fed, free-range, best-reared, loved chicken breast

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

20g plain flour

1 egg, beaten

130g Japanese panko breadcrumbs sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

For the Café de Paris butter

90g unsalted butter

1 teaspoon ketchup

½ teaspoon Dijon mustard

5g capers

1 tablespoon shallots, sliced

½ teaspoon parsley, roughly chopped

½ teaspoon chives, roughly chopped

a small pinch of majoram, roughly chopped

a small pinch of dill, roughly chopped

a small pinch of thyme, roughly chopped

¼ teaspoon tarragon, roughly chopped

½ small garlic clove, sliced

a small pinch of rosemary, chopped

1 anchovy

a dash of Worcestershire sauce

a small pinch of cayenne pepper

a large pinch of curry powder

¼ teaspoon paprika

2 black peppercorns

¼ teaspoon sea salt

1 teaspoon each orange zest and juice

1 teaspoon each lemon zest and juice

½ teaspoon brandy

½ teaspoon Madeira wine

To serve

½ lemon, cut into wedges

shredded cabbage

To make the butter, combine all the ingredients except the orange and lemon juices, brandy and Madeira. Let this sit for 24 hours at room temperature and then blitz in a food processor along with the citrus zest and juices and the alcohol. Tip the mixture onto a sheet of clingfilm and roll into a 4cm log, wrap and store in the refrigerator or freeze until firm. Cut off slices as needed – the butter will keep for months in the freezer and up to a week or so in the fridge.

For the katsu, make a cut in the thickest part of the breast, so that you even the overall thickness out. Fold out the part you’ve just cut – you now have a flatter, wider breast.

Heat the oil in a fryer or large pan to 180°C/350°F.

Season the chicken breast well with salt and pepper and then toss it in the flour. Run the breast through the egg to coat it well and then press it into the breadcrumbs. With good coarse crumbs you need only do this once, but if the crumbs are too fine you’ll need to repeat the process and double crumb.

Deep-fry the chicken for about 2½ minutes, then remove with a perforated scoop and drain well on kitchen paper. Slice into 1cm strips, and serve alongside the lemon, cabbage and 2 or 3 dollops of gently melted Café de Paris butter.



Deluxe Chicken Katsu with Café De Paris Butter