BBQ AND FIRE PITS



FIRE PIT QUAIL

Quail rhymes with baby whale! ‘So what?’ you may ask. Well, I’ll tell you. As a (sometimes) mischievous young chef, my fellow chefs and I used to take great pleasure in confusing the waiters as best we could. On one particular occasion we assured one of them that the special of the day was pan-roasted baby whale. That particular waiter was well aged and possibly had a few screws loose so she totally went for it.

She went ahead and told all of the waiters who gave different reactions: anger, laughter, confusion and even belief! We managed to get a few more miles out of that one until it was finally banned. Not to worry, there are hundreds of kitchen pranks to work with – that very same waiter was also led to believe that we were keeping a pet cat in the kitchen. I thought, hang on, she’s just playing along with the gag, even when we left bowls of milk out for it. Apparently not – eventually she told the boss about it and, just like that, our imaginary cat was gone forever!

Anyway, back to the recipe… here is some sweet, smoky quail, roasted over cedar and charcoal.

SERVES 2

2 quail

40ml sake

2 spring onions, roughly chopped, plus a little extra

4cm piece ginger, roughly chopped, plus a little extra

4cm piece kombu, plus a little extra

steamed rice, to serve

For the teriyaki glaze

1 part sake

1 part mirin

1 part dark soy sauce

½ part caster sugar

Make the glaze by warming the ingredients over a gentle heat to dissolve the sugar. Cool and chill.

Prepare the quail by trimming the wing tips and removing the innards if not already done. Rinse with sake and drain away the sake.

Put the quail in a bowl and pour half the teriyaki glaze into its cavity, swish it about, then stuff with the spring onion, ginger and kombu. The liquid will leak a little, save what you can of it.

Get a fire going using some charcoal and cedarwood, if you can get it. If not, then stick with just the charcoal, you will just miss out on the extra smokiness. Let the fire die down so that you have red-hot glowing embers.

Place the quail on a sheet of foil with a few extra pieces of spring onion, ginger, kombu and the remaining teriyaki sauce. Wrap it all up and bury it in the charcoal and wood embers. It will take around 20 minutes to slowly cook through.

Remove your package, and, using tongs, carefully open up the foil package and see how it’s getting on – if the leg pulls away from the body easily, the quail is cooked. If there is some resistance, wrap it up again and bury it in the embers for a few more minutes.

I’d suggest you open up your little barbecued quail bomb and dump it out onto a deep plate, sauce and all, then get stuck in with your fingers. I highly recommend some hot, freshly steamed rice to soak up those sweet, smoky juices.



Fire Pit Quail

TEA- SMOKED LAMB WITH SPICY KOREAN MISO

I grew up eating lamb chops from the barbecue. For as long as I can remember, lamb chops always featured on most people’s ‘barbies’ where I came from. The best, most moreish thing about barbecued lamb chops is when the fatty part becomes golden, verging on charred or slightly crunchy. So, this version was born out of a yearning for the chops from my childhood. I needed to get some smoky barbecue attributes without overcooking the meat (like we used to at home) enter the smoking process…

Using Japanese sencha with my woodchips was a natural choice, which worked perfectly. I’ve tried it with other Japanese teas such as genmai cha and matcha, and both work brilliantly, but the sencha seemed to be received the best in the restaurant. This smoking technique can be used for other ingredients such as prawns, salmon belly, scallops or chicken. Before you get stuck into smoking your chops, you’ll need to marinate them. For ours we are adding some umami (that secret wallop of flavour that turns you from a backyard barbecue nobody to the ‘Holy Shit’ barbecue boss). Secondly the salt in the marinade helps the meat to take on the smoke – yep, somehow that’s true!

Never been a smoker? Don’t worry, it’s pretty straightforward. You don’t really need any fancy kit either: an old wok, a wire cake rack or something similar, something to cover the wok with (a plate, bowl or ugly hat) and you’re off and racing!

SERVES 4

8 plump lamb chops

½ tablespoon rapeseed oil

spicy Korean miso

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

For the lamb cure mix

½ red onion, roughly chopped

2 garlic cloves

2cm piece ginger

1 long red chilli

a small handful of coriander stems and roots

20g sea salt

For the smoke mix

50g fine smoking chips

70g uncooked rice

35g sencha green tea leaves

First make the cure mix. You can do this a day or so in advance. Blitz all the ingredients together in a food processor until fine. Coat the lamb in the mix and allow it to marinate for 2 hours in the refrigerator.

After 2 hours, wipe the cure mix off the lamb chops. Line a wok or similar large pan with foil and then place it over a high heat and add in the wood chips. Once smoking, add the rice and heat through, then add the green tea.

Place the lamb chops on a rack and place over the smoke, covering well. Hot smoke f or 2 minutes on each side.

Remove the lamb chops from the heat and set aside for at least a couple of hours to allow the harsh astringent smokiness to mellow. Chill until required.

When you’re ready to cook the lamb chops, rub each one lightly with a little oil and season with some sea salt and freshly ground black pepper.

Heat a ridged grill pan until searingly hot. Chargrill the lamb chops for about 2½ minutes on each side – it should be cooked on the outside but pink on the inside. Serve with the spicy Korean miso on the side.



Tea-Smoked Lamb with Spicy Korean Miso

SLOW- COOKED BARBECUED PORK BELLY WITH RED MISO SAUCE

Slow cooked this, slow cooked that – it’s mentioned all over the place these days, and it’s almost a bit too trendy for my liking. Bah humbug you might say. It’s not that I’m not into it. I clearly am. It may just be a case of, sometimes, false advertising: the term ‘slow cooking’ thrown about by foodies (another annoying term of our times) and chefs to evoke feelings of passion and lovingly cooked food when it isn’t always accurate.

If you’re cooking ‘low and slow’, as it’s often called in North America, you need to be down with your temperatures and timings. Experimenting is one way to go. It’s really fun and can lead to great results. No time for that malarkey? You could always look up Harold McGee or type into the Google machine, or check this out. Follow the recipe closely – it will be spot on.

The whole purpose of slow cooking is to break down the tough connective tissue of the meat until it’s soft and gelatinous at the same time as not overcooking the more vulnerable meat fibres. It can be a tricky balancing act, but one that comes with a whole load of fun as you experiment heaps and pig out on the results.

Do not attempt this with cheap and lacklustre pork. Make an effort to find a good breed such as Gloucester Old Spot or the Berkshire pig, one that has been farmed with care. This isn’t about being all ‘cheffy’, it makes a shit-ton of difference to the end dish. You can cook the pork and chill it a couple of days ahead of when you plan to serve it.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

2kg good-quality pork belly

For the cure mix

1 teaspoon Sichuan peppercorns

100g fine sea salt

2 small dried red chillies (if they are killer-hot, deseed)

55g soft brown sugar

10cm piece kombu, broken into small pieces

For the slow-cook mix

2 litres dashi

200ml sake

200ml mirin

200ml dark soy sauce

5cm piece kombu

1cm slice ginger

For the red miso sauce

1 tablespoon sake

1 tablespoon mirin

55g caster sugar

100g red miso paste

To serve

½ Granny Smith apple

roasted cashew nuts, chopped, optional

First, toast the Sichuan peppercorns in a small dry pan over a medium heat until aromatic. Remove and put in a clean, dry blender or spice grinder with the remaining ingredients for the cure. Blitz together until fine.

Next, rub the pork belly all over with the cure mix, then cover with clingfilm and refrigerate for 1 hour.

Take the pork belly out of the fridge and rinse away the cure mix with cold running water, drain well.

Combine all the ingredients for the slow-cook mix in a bowl and pour into a large vacuum-pack plastic bag, along with the cured pork belly. Carefully seal and suck out as much air as possible. Alternatively, if you’re the type of person who like things a little more low-tech, then simply put the pork belly in a large roasting tray and cover entirely with the slow-cook mixture; the trick will be to find an ovenproof tray that will allow for both the pork and this amount of liquid. Clingfilm it well, maybe even twice, then cover twice with foil.

Now, we have two possible ways to proceed. This part gets a bit like those Pick-a-Path books…

Option 1: If you have an oven that will allow you to cook using 50 per cent steam and 50 per cent convection, crank it up to 85°C/65°C fan, put the pork in and set your timer to 8½ hours.

Option 2: If you have a basic oven, crank that up to 110°C/90°C fan/Gas Mark ¼ and place another roasting tray, filled with water, on the bottom shelf. Get your pork tray in there to cook for about 7 hours. It’s hard to judge perfectly as ovens are not always calibrated properly. If it’s not lovely and soft when you press a fork into it, keep the pork cooking and keep checking.

Once the cooking is complete, cool the pork as quickly as possible. Baggers can fill the sink with ice and water and really get it chilled down mega-fast. Tray lovers can take the pork out and cool it on a wire rack. Once cooled, refrigerate for a good 2 hours to get it really chilled before cutting away the rind, then portion into 10cm x 3cm pieces. At this stage, the pork can be kept in the fridge for up to 3 days if you want to prep it in advance of serving.

To make the miso sauce, combine the sake, mirin and sugar in a saucepan and bring to the boil. Whisk in the red miso and cook for about 30 seconds, until well combined. Remove from the heat and cool.

The next part is almost effortless, so if you’ve done all your homework, you’ll look pretty slick when you whip it out in front of your future fans!

Either get that charcoal cranked up and barbecue the porky portions over the glowing hot charcoal (let any flames die down so that you have a super-hot, even charcoal base), until well coloured. Alternatively, heat up a little oil in a frying pan and sear the pork over a medium-high heat until you have golden porky goodness.

Once well coloured, chop your porky chunks into 3–4 pieces so that they can be easily managed with chopsticks.

Smear some of the red miso sauce onto your serving dish, top with your porky bits then grate the apple (leaving the skin on) and make a little pile on the plate. I’d recommend some chopped roasted cashews scattered over the lot as well.



Slow-Cooked Barbecued Pork Belly with Red Miso Sauce



MAKIN’ BACON

Bacon isn’t the kind of ingredient that springs to mind when you start thinking about Japanese food. It is, however, one of the first items that jumps out at me on an izakaya menu. Asparagus or scallops wrapped in bacon then grilled over glowing charcoal with a soy-mirin glaze are as part of the Japanese izakaya as anything else. You’ll even see it offered in okonomiyaki.

I was pretty stoked to discover this when I first visited Tokyo. I returned to London with makin’ bacon on my mind. I wanted to make use of Japanese ingredients, not just come up with a nice bacon. Kombu was the first, most obvious inclusion. Pork belly needs to be brined before it is hung to mature (and sometimes smoked). The kombu was going to make this bacon worth fucking about with. (Kombu is like a secret weapon – seriously, it’s some gourmet shit!)

The recipe makes more cure than you need for but make it all and store it – it lasts for ages. We sometimes use the cure for salting Chinese cabbage before making it into Kurobuta-style kimchi (as an alternative to the one here ).

MAKES 800G BACON

1kg boneless pork belly (rind is fine to leave on)

For the cure (enough for a 2kg pork, see introduction above)

1kg fine salt

80g toasted Sichuan peppercorns

30g dried red chillies (I use Japanese taka-no-tsume chillies)

570g dark brown sugar

20cm piece kombu

Equipment

2 nice big sheets of muslin (enough to triple wrap the pork belly)

To make the cure, blend all the ingredients in a spice grinder until fine. Put on some gloves and rub the pork belly vigorously with the cure mix. Massage, caress and finish it off by adding an extra layer of the mix. The idea is that it needs to be really well rubbed in as well as having a nice coating.

Wrap the pork belly up neatly and tightly with the muslin and tie it up with the kitchen string, like you were wrapping a bow around a box. Hang it from a shelf in your fridge for 3½ days. It’s really important that when the bacon hangs it isn’t touching anything. If it does, it can attract a build up of moisture, which leads to spoilage. The aim here is to allow it to dry out and let it continue to cure so that the flavours develop.

Unwrap, rinse off the cure and dry well with a paper towel or tea towel. Rewrap as before in fresh muslin. Now for the long wait. Hang once again from a shelf in your fridge for 2 weeks – you’ll have yourself some bacon!

When it’s time to use, cut carefully into long bacon-like slices. Use up the trimmings in stir-fries, risottos, or fry until crunchy and blend it into a big, fat, porky homemade mayonnaise.



Makin’ Bacon

ASPARA- BACON KUSHI

If you’ve never tried bacon, I mean real bacon from a pig (not turkey, veal or tofu bacon), I feel bad for you, genuinely. I regret the fact that religion or diet choice had a part to play in why there are many who haven’t loved this product before, but it is so damn good, salty, sometimes smoky, sometimes crunchy, always full of umami (except for watery cheap shit, don’t even go near it), always a joy to add to risotto, wrap over chicken or scallops, sandwich between bread, the list goes on…

Not traditionally Japanese, bacon is a super-common ingredient in a kushyaki, or okonomiyaki bar. Aspara-bacon, literally asparagus and bacon skewers, is something I can never avoid.

You won’t really need much by way of accompaniment, just a light drizzle of some sweet, sticky soy sauce would be spot on.

Do not attempt this with imposter bacon – veal, turkey or whatever else is sacrilegiously used to impersonate the real deal – there is no substitute for bacon awesomeness. Wanna make your own bacon? Check out here . It’s not so difficult and well worth the effort.

Another thing, don’t make this out of asparagus season; it is worth waiting until tasty, local stuff is available. In the UK, asparagus season is really short so get stuck into it as often as you can, while you can.

SERVES 2

6 asparagus spears

100g homemade bacon strips , or any properly good bacon

a dash of oil

sweet soy sauce or lemon wedges, to serve

For the glaze

50ml mirin

50ml dark soy sauce

Mix the glaze in a spray bottle and set aside.

Peel the lower part of the asparagus – how high you go depends on how thick the outer skin is and how high up it goes. Eat a spear of asparagus and check where the tenderness finishes and you’ll be able to tell how much of it needs peeling.

Wrap your strips of bacon around the asparagus, leaving the tips exposed.

Crank up your barbecue (you could do this in a frying pan but you’ll miss out on one of the most important elements of this dish – the scorching way of the barbecue).

When you have a pit of mesmerising hot coals, gently stroke your asparagus with a little oil, then introduce them to the scorch.

Get out your spray bottle of mirin and soy, and give the asparagus a few bursts of glaze (be generous!) during the entire grilling process. Once the asparagus spears are nicely glazed and scorched from the barbie, whip them off and onto your serving plate.

A little sweet soy sauce is my favourite accompaniment, or you could serve them with lemon, salt and pepper. Crack open a frosty beer and get stuck in!



Aspara-Bacon Kushi

BEER- GRILLED RIB EYE STEAK

Grilling or barbecuing and drinking beer is a universal thing; no matter where I’ve been it seems that standing around a barbecue, grilling meat, staring into the flames and drinking frosty beer is some kind of pastime. It’s the next evolutionary step to add beer to the barbecue cooking itself. When I was a kid in Australia, blokes would always clean the barbie by pouring some of their beer over the hot plate. I’m not convinced that there is much proof that there was any serious cleaning made possible by beer only, but it did help lift off the burnt onions left from the last session. I love the idea of this, it’s a tradition that, if one day beer vanished forever (God forbid!), we could replace with water. But I’ll always do it – a nod to Aussie barbecuers and my childhood perhaps.

I use a black lager made by Asahi for this recipe. You could use a lager, I suppose, or a Guinness would work. Hoppy beers or ales steer too far away from the Japanese thing, so for best results don’t try replacing the Asahi Black with those.

This marinade also works really well with skirt and fillet steak. I’ve used it on chicken thighs as well, and it comes up trumps.

SERVES 6

6 rib eye steaks, about 300g each

300g dried soba noodles

For the beer marinade

2 litres Asahi Black, or other lager

350g ginger, sliced

15 garlic cloves

400g daikon, grated

150ml low-sodium soy sauce

350ml mirin

100ml roasted sesame oil

5cm piece kombu

For the dressing

150ml light soy sauce

90ml mirin

60ml sake

12 spring onions, chopped

155g soft light brown sugar

30g pickled wasabi stem (kizami wasabi)

To serve

a handful of toasted sesame seeds

frosty cold beer

Mix together all the ingredients for the beer marinade and marinate the steaks for between 12 and 24 hours in the fridge. Remove the steaks from the marinade after 2 4 hours.

The ideal way to cook your beer steak, obviously, is on the barbecue. If you need to do it in a pan, so be it; the steak will still taste nice, but that’s all, just nice.

Grill your steak to your personal liking. I don’t think I really need to mention that this will be best cooked rare – why you want to eat dry, cardboard-like steak is beyond me, but if that’s really how you’ve been eating steak then you’re lame! Wake up to something better – go grab a very good-quality steak, use this marinade, then slice it up thinly. Taste it – still want to eat the shit you thought was steak? If you’ve answered yes, close this book and never pretend to know a single thing about food ever again, your taste buds are dead to me.

When your steak is done, let it rest while you prepare something to serve with it.

I dig this with noodles, but making a steak sandwich with some tempura onions (see here ), umami mayo and pickled cucumber is some serious ass-kicking sandwich action. However, for the noodles…

Cook the noodles in a large pan in plenty of rapidly boiling water for 5–6 minutes. Drain and rinse under cold running water, and allow to cool to room temperature then chill.

Make the dressing by mixing the soy sauce, mirin, sake and spring onions, along with some sugar and wasabi, too.

To serve, arrange your cold soba noodles on your favourite plate, slice your beer-grilled steak and lay over the noodles (or not). Drizzle over the dressing, sprinkle with some freshly toasted sesame seeds and do some of that chewing where you grin at the same time.

And yes, cold beer on the side is pretty fucking important!



Beer-Grilled Rib Eye Steak

MISO- GRILLED BABY CHICKEN WITH LEMON-GARLIC-CHILLI DIPPER

So here we have some baby chicken, or, as the Frenchies call it, poussin. Quite possibly a far better name; after all, eating the ‘baby’ of something isn’t always such an appealing idea. It does, however, help to describe it on a menu.

This marinade is extremely versatile: use it for salmon belly, scallops, steaks, even tofu. It is also a very good sauce base: just add some mustard and vinegar and serve with sashimi or caramelised onions and it will be your lamb chop’s best mate.

I use baby chicken for this because not only does the skin caramelise very quickly but the flesh cooks through before the skin starts to burn – perfect for our robata grill or your home barbecue.

Pre-barbecue season, you ought to make a batch of this stuff and keep it refrigerated in case you have a last-minute barbie crop up. It lasts for ages and with it on standby you’ll look like the Japanese barbecue emperor with very little effort – you cool mo-fo!

SERVES 4

2 baby chickens, aka poussins

For the marinade

100ml den miso

1–2 green chillies, chopped (quantity depends on how much you can handle)

For the lemon-garlic-chilli dipper

100ml sake

generous 2 tablespoons dark soy sauce

1 scorcher of a red chilli, finely chopped

2 teaspoons green Tabasco sauce

2 teaspoons fresh garlic purée

2 teaspoons yuzu juice

2 tablespoons lemon juice

2 tablespoons olive oil

For the daikon salad

100g daikon

50g carrot

50g cucumber

5 or 6 mint leaves

10 coriander leaves, with a bit of stem left on

10ml yuzu juice

a few drops of dark soy sauce

a few drops of extra virgin olive oil

First, make the marinade by mixing the den miso and the chillies together. Use a sharp knife to cut each poussin clean in half and make a couple of score marks, one into the fat part of the drumstick and the other into the thigh. Marinate in the miso-chilli marinade for at least 6 hours and up to 12 hours.

To make the dipper, whisk all the ingredients, except the oil, like a crazy fucker. Slowly whisk in the oil until emulsified. This will keep in the fridge until the end of time, maybe.

To make the salad, thinly slice the daikon on a Japanese mandoline and layer the slices in piles of 5 or 6 and, using a knife, shred very thinly. Do the same with the carrot and cucumber and mix together. Add the mint and coriander leaves and drizzle with the yuzu, soy sauce and extra virgin olive oil.

Set up your barbecue and get the charcoal super-hot – the flames start to die down a little, and the embers will be glowing – then put your poussins on the grill. If you’re concerned about the poussins not being cooked through enough and burning, take off the barbecue and finish cooking in a hot oven, about 180°C/160°C fan/Gas Mark 4 for 8–10 minutes. To test the chicken to see if it’s fully cooked, insert a thin metal skewer or the sharp end of small knife into the thickest part of the thigh, pause for a couple of seconds, pull it and hold the skewer to your lip. Feel burning? It’s cooked through. Didn’t burn much? You’ve either lost all feeling to your lips (dial for help!) or it’s not done yet – keep on cooking. Once cooked, serve it up as it is, or, if you want to get a little bit fancier, chop it up into smaller pieces.

We serve this in the restaurant with the shredded daikon salad on the side, which is a nice and refreshing contrast to the miso and chilli.



Miso-Grilled Baby Chicken with Lemon-Garlic-Chilli Dipper

KUSHIYAKI GRILLING

As you may well see from the photo, it’s all about grilling on sticks. In Japan, it’s far more complicated than my very basic description here. The angle of the skewers and how many are used is dependent on the ingredients, or how they are cut. You have lengthways skewering (tate-gushi), side skewering (yoko-gushi), flat skewering (hira-gushi), and the list goes on.

I use two long skewers for the meat ones. This simply holds them better: no escaping, meat! Also, always soak your bamboo skewers in water for an hour or so, this way they don’t set alight when you’re grilling.

For the glaze, mix together 1 part soy to 1 part mirin and brush or spray all over your sticks of goodness. (Fill a spray bottle and use this to spray your skewers as they cook.)

Grilling over hot charcoal is essential; kushiyaki grilling really shouldn’t be done any other way.

I want to keep it pretty basic, so here are some examples of the simple preparations that we use, but it is worth having some fun with it, too.

Spicy sausage and spring onions: at the restaurant, we make a very garlicky, spicy pork sausage and skewer it with spring onions.

Corn with spicy shiso ponzu : cut the corn into 2cm-thick chunks and glaze with ponzu.

Miso steak and white onions: marinate the steak in den miso for a couple of hours before skewering with onions and grilling.

Boneless confit wings with spicy mayo: cut wings into individual joints and cook at 55°C/130°F in duck fat with kombu and ginger for 12 hours – cool and remove the bones then skewer and grill, serving with spicy mayo such as umami mayo or yuzu kosho mayo .

All of your ingredients should be given a slathering of the soy-mirin spray whilst grilling. It’s nice to serve a load of different sauces too: try spicy shiso ponzu , yellow chilli dressing , kimchi mayo (perfect with spicy sausage), chilli-miso-truffle , spicy miso , spicy Korean miso .



Kushiyaki Grilling

YELLOWTAIL KAMAYAKI

This is an absolutely classic dish that everyone should try it at least once. When I first tried it, I was reluctant. It looks like some bone and skin from near the head of the fish with a little too much salt on. At that time, I had only just become a huge fan of all things sashimi and wasn’t quite up for what looked like overcooked fish. I was handed a teaspoon and small pot of ponzu sauce; I’ll never forget the creaminess, the slight saltiness and the amazing crunchy skin. I was yet again blown away and surprised by Japanese cuisine.

You can make this with salmon collar or the small fins near the belly of the salmon. The preparation is so damn easy I can’t even provide a recipe. It’s simply a matter of this…

SERVES 1 GREEDY BUGGER OR 2 SHARING-TYPE EATERS

1 whole yellowtail or salmon collar

sea salt, to sprinkle

To serve

40ml ponzu sauce

1 teaspoon finely grated daikon (tastes great and is really good for digestion, too)

a few lemon wedges

Ask your fishmonger (like we all have our own private fish dude, what a load of shit us chefs talk sometimes, I’ll start again…) Find a fishmonger or fish supplier and ask for the yellowtail or salmon collar.

Make an X-shaped cut in the thickest, meatiest part of the collar. Preheat your grill – top heat is required here. Liberally sprinkle sea salt over the skin side of the collar, not on the underside.

Once your grill is hot, place the fish skin-side up and start cooking. It will take 12–15 minutes for the skin to begin to colour and blister.

Take off the heat and let the fish cool slightly. Stick a thin knife into the fleshiest part to check the temperature – if the knife blade is piping hot, the fish is ready.

Mix the ponzu with the daikon and serve together on the side with a wedge of lemon.



Yellowtail Kamayaki

KOMBU- ROASTED CHILEAN SEA BASS

Roasting meat or fish on kombu is like flavour-cheating. Kombu is one of the top umami-rich ingredients. In short, umami-rich ingredients have large taste profiles, so, in this case, the kombu is simply adding tastiness. You may have heard about monosodium glutamate (MSG), basically a chemical seasoning famous in the Orient, which can instantly boost flavour with a very small pinch. I suppose this is the real flavour cheat. MSG was developed by a Japanese professor – the very same professor who discovered and named umami – and it was his quick and easy chemical version that became a massive hit all over Asia. Anyway, don’t go down the route of sprinkling that nasty stuff in your food – tastiness can be ‘boosted’ naturally with the likes of kombu, amongst plenty of other things.

Serves 2, as part of a multi-course menu

10cm piece kombu

40ml sake

150g slice Chilean sea bass (failing this, a firm oily fish or salmon belly will do)

2 small knobs of unsalted butter

spicy shiso ponzu , to serve

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

We cook this in a wood-fired oven at around 250°C but use an oven preheated to 240°C/220°C fan/Gas Mark 9 if you want.

Soak the kombu in the sake for 1 hour.

Drain the kombu and put it on a chopping board. Place the sea bass on the kombu, squash the butter on top and season with salt and pepper. Lift the assembly onto a roasting tray and cook for 10–12 minutes. This is the kind of fish that benefits from being well cooked – standard fish cooking rules don’t apply here – it’s done when you see the flesh beginning to flake nicely.

You can also cook it over charcoal on your barbecue. Set the fish onto the soaked kombu, as above, with the butter and seasoning, then place over moderately hot coals and put a stainless-steel bowl over the top. Depending on how hot your coals are, the fish should take about 15 minutes.

Serve the Chilean sea bass on the kombu with a generous dousing of spicy shiso ponzu (remind your diners that they shouldn’t eat the kombu – we have guests giving it a shot quite often, despite the warning).



Kombu-Roasted Chilean Sea Bass

ROASTED SCALLOP WITH YUZU-TRUFFLE-EGG SAUCE AND YUZU TOBIKO

Eggs and their yolks are one of the most incredible ingredients ever. You can eat them cooked in various ways for breakfast, make ice cream, mayonnaise, polonaise, chop up boiled ones for sandwiches and, if you’re mad enough, bury them until they’re properly fucked up. What a wonderful ingredient! Me, I can’t handle raw yolks. It’s something I’ve tried to overcome many times but I still can’t manage them. If I taste a slightly undercooked ice cream base I’ll notice it. I’ve even fired somebody over it. Don’t proclaim to know how to be a fucking pastry chef if you can’t cook a proper ice cream base – because my weird problem with eggs will lead to you being caught out!

So, imagine when I had to taste a raw Japanese egg sauce that is basically whisked up yolks with seasonings. No fucking chance! The trouble is that it looks so damn good. All egg yolk preparations do. It’s just that I’m cursed with not being able to tolerate the taste. The solution was easy. I could have these flavours and textures if I were to cook the egg yolk like a hollandaise sauce. I don’t really care that it’s not traditional, it works.

SERVES 2

1 fresh egg yolk

1 tablespoon sauce reduction (see below)

200ml clarified butter

1 teaspoon lemon juice

1 teaspoon yuzu juice

1½ teaspoons light soy sauce

white truffle oil, to taste

25g butter

a splash of olive oil

2 large diver scallops (or 4 smaller ones)

20g Japanese mushrooms, thinly sliced (whatever you have available – shiitake, oyster, shimeji, etc.)

8g yuzu tobiko (flying fish roe), to serve

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

For the sauce reduction

1 small white onion, finely diced

2 thin slices ginger

150ml sake

150ml rice vinegar

First, make the sauce reduction by heating the ingredients in a pan over a medium heat. When it begins to bubble, turn the heat down to a simmer and allow to reduce by about three-quarters. Once reduced pour through a sieve and discard the solids.

In a bowl set over a pan of gently simmering water (make sure the bowl doesn’t touch the water), whisk the egg yolk and 1 tablespoon of the reduction together vigorously, over a medium heat for 8 minutes, until the mixture becomes creamy and ribbon-like in consistency. Remove the bowl from the heat.

In a saucepan, melt the clarified butter and then gradually add to the egg-reduction mixture, in a slow trickle. Once the butter has been fully emulsified, add the lemon and yuzu juices, soy sauce and truffle oil, and season with sea salt to taste. Keep covered in a warm place until required.

Heat a non-stick pan and drop in a couple of blocks of good-quality butter (not emulsified veg oil shit that you picked up for half price – I mean butter, from cows) plus a splash of olive oil. Season your scallops with a little sea salt and freshly ground black pepper on both sides and, when the butter has melted and the pan is hot, add the scallops. Fry on one side only to begin with, until you have achieved a deep golden brown colour – this could take 2–3 minutes over a medium-high heat. Just prior to taking your golden beauties out of the pan, flip the scallops to given them a gentle warming on the yet-to-be-cooked side. Seriously, they only need 2 seconds then get them outta the pan!

In the same pan, whilst still hot, throw in some thinly sliced Japanese mushrooms. Cook for 1–2 minutes over a medium heat, until softened and a little coloured.

Time to plate up… Scallops onto the plate, top with the fried mushrooms, a large dollop-like drizzle of the sauce over the lot, then a scattering of yuzu tobiko.

Note: We use the following alternative garnishes in the restaurant: a scattering of hijiki , or crispy renkon chips: slice fresh renkon (or lotus) on a mandoline, deep-fry in oil at 170°C/340°F, and then bake in a preheated oven on its lowest setting for 30 minutes to finish crisping.



Roasted Scallop with Yuzu-Truffle-Egg Sauce and Yuzu Tobiko

LANGOUSTINES BAKED IN BARLEY MISO AND SAKE

This is one for the barbecue!

The langoustines get wrapped up in a double layer of foil and then nestled in the hot coals. I used to simply grill the langoustines, split in half, right on the grill bars – which is great, but I reckon you lose too much of the flavour. By cooking in the foil you retain all of the juices and you get to introduce the vapour of sake and meatiness of barley miso.

Barley miso is a chunky red miso, also known in Japan as moro (or moromi miso). It’s commonly used as a condiment and is a total classic when a small dollop is served on a slice of cucumber. It’s a pretty decent bar snack. Barley miso is a very good marinade for chicken thigh or salmon belly . It’s not the kind of miso that you would normally make miso soup from, but combined with some shiro miso, it works really well.

SERVES 2

6 langoustines, whole (cut lengthways through the middle, bash each claw to break it – you want easy access after cooking and it allows the flavours easy access, too)

40g barley miso

40ml sake

a pinch of flaked sea salt

Crank up the barbie.

Mix the langoustines in a bowl with the miso, sake and salt, then pour on top of a double layer of foil. Wrap it up tightly, squishing the edges and doing your best to ensure there are no holes.

Nestle the langoustines into the hot barbecue coals and cook for 10–15 minutes (very hot coals will take 10 minutes, weak coals, or not enough coals, will take longer).

Pour the cooked langoustines (along with any juices) into a bowl and feast! (Don’t forget to drink the juices.)



Langoustines Baked in Barley Miso and Sake