SOMETHING CRUNCHY



GOBA TEMPURA IN KINOME SALT AND GRAPES

We don’t serve a great deal of tempura dishes at Kurobuta. We don’t copy the masses of Japanese-wanna-be joints that list every shitty, often out of season vegetable they can manage to think of and fry it in mass-produced glug, also referred to as batter, even tempura batter. To quote from The Big Lebowski , ‘Your revolution is over.’ It’s not good enough to serve up total shit in fancy surroundings anymore. Why do I sound so cynical? Because here’s the truth folks: this is exactly what happens, not always of course, but for the most part, the world over. It’s junk, don’t accept it.

Gobo is known in English as burdock and it’s grown here in the UK. You often find it in dandelion and burdock drinks available in loads of places nowadays. Thinly cut gobo, dipped in this light batter and quickly fried makes an excellent snack. The flavour is distinct and earthy and doesn’t require a dipping sauce – a little salt and lemon is all you need. Kinome is a tiny mega-fragrant green leafy herb from the sansho plant. Admittedly, it may be a struggle to find some, but there is a very cool couple growing this in East Sussex in the UK … go hunting for them! Alternatively, grab some sansho pepper.

SERVES 2, AS PART OF A LARGER SNACK SELECTION OR MULTI-COURSE MENU

a squeeze of lemon juice

20cm gobo

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

20g plain flour, for dusting

60ml trisol batter , chilled

For the kinome salt

6 sprigs kinome, or sansho pepper

2 tablespoons flaked sea salt, such as Maldon

To serve

flaked sea salt

2–3 grapes, halved

lemon wedges

Fill a bowl with water and add a squeeze of lemon. Peel and cut the gobo into 8–12cm lengths, then into fat matchsticks. Quickly drop them into the lemon water, otherwise they’ll turn black quickly. Set aside.

Next, make the kinome salt. If you’ve managed to find, grow or steal some kinome then pick off the leaves and smash them up in a mortar and pestle with the sea salt. Refrigerate. Alternatively, if you’re using the sansho pepper, put a few pinches into the salt, smash it up and it’s good to go!

Just before you want to eat this, heat your fryer filled with spanking fresh rapeseed oil to 180°C/350°F. Drain the gobo from the lemon water, dry well on some kitchen paper, then lightly dredge in the flour. Shake to remove any excess.

Piece by piece, dip the gobo into the batter, then immediately into that nice hot glistening bath of oil. Deep-fry for about 2 minutes, until nicely golden and crunchy. Remove with a perforated spoon, drain on kitchen paper, and it’s ready to serve up.

Arrange the crunchy gobo on a sheet of tempura paper (yeah, tempura has its own fancy paper! If you don’t have any kicking about, print some naked photos of yourself and serve it on that, or not). The paper will soak up any excess oil. Place a little pile of the salt on the side and serve with the grapes and a freshly cut wedge of lemon.



Goba Tempura in Kinome Salt and Grapes

LITTLE SHRIMP TEMPURA WITH KIMCHI AND KIMCHI MAYO

Do you remember when rock shrimp was as en-vogue as Harrods clothing or coked-up models? I do. It swept the planet like a plague of boy bands – you couldn’t avoid it. I remember when I was asked to smuggle two large suitcases of frozen rock shrimp into Mykonos so they could feel the fashion. (Well, that was the ‘naughties’ and sustainability, MSC accreditation and shrimp-miles hadn’t quite become as trendy as they needed to be.)

To be honest, I used to scoff my fair share of rock shrimp tempura, moreish little buggers they are. But something very similar can be created with similar small, plump shrimps, which are far more plentiful, as well as affordable. Here’s my nod to that superstar of a dish.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

120g small plump prawns, shells removed and deveined

15g tempura flour, for coating

70ml ice-cold trisol batter

salt

To serve

10g harusame noodles

30g kimchi pickle

25ml kimchi mayo

¼ small red onion, thinly sliced, rinsed and drained well

1 teaspoon chopped chives

10 slices green chilli

Heat the oil in a fryer or large pan to 180°C/350°F. Add the noodles and deep-fry for a few seconds, until crisp and nicely puffed. Remove with a perforated scoop and drain on a plate lined with kitchen paper.

Mix about 10 per cent salt to water (around 30g salt to 300ml water) and wash the prawns in the salty water. Drain well.

If you’ve let it cool down, crank the oil in a fryer or large pan back to 180°C/350°F, and toss the prawns in the tempura flour, shaking to coat well. Place the prawns in a colander and shake off the excess flour.

Next, drop the prawns into the ice-cold batter, one by one, and, by hand, coat each in the batter. Working quickly, drop the prawns individually into the hot oil, spacing them well apart. Cook for about 2½ minutes until nice and golden (traditionally tempura is much paler but this batter won’t work if we try to cook it less to try and achieve the pale colour – besides, these little nuggets will be crunchier than the pale stuff). Remove the prawns with a perforated scoop and allow to drain well in a colander.

Arrange your crunchy harusame noodles on a suitable plate – I use a shallow bowl so they don’t slide around when being rushed from the kitchen to the table. Dot kimchi over the plate, top with the crunchy prawns, drizzle with the kimchi mayo (best done using a squeezy bottle with a thin nozzle), then scatter with the red onion, chives and chilli slices.

Eat quickly and be merry!



Little Shrimp Tempura with Kimchi and Kimchi Mayo

SQUID KARA-AGE WITH YELLOW CHILLI DRESSING

OK, firstly let’s clear up some common confusion with the term ‘kara-age’. It often gets confused with ‘kaki-age’, probably because both have the word ‘age’ (pronounced a-geh) in the name, which refers to the dish being fried. As far as I can tell, Westerners seem to be far more familiar with kara-age than kaki-age, so receiving kaki-age when you thought you’d ordered kara-age could leave you a little dazed and confused. Let’s finally clear this up. Kara-age is when an ingredient (most popular being chicken) is fried in seasoned flour or other plain starch. Kaki-age is when various ingredients are combined with tempura batter and fried in clusters, sometimes large, sometimes small, and these are more refined. Enough of that, let’s recipe…

This dish is always eaten hard and fast so make plenty!

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

80g small baby squid

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

½ lime, cut into wedges, to serve

For the yellow chilli dressing

1 yellow pepper

3 long yellow chillies, plus a few extra to serve

3 garlic cloves, crushed

50ml Japanese rice vinegar

1 tablespoon lemon juice

1 teaspoon green Tabasco

a large pinch of katsuobushi (bonito flakes)

a pinch of sea salt

150ml grapeseed oil

For the daikon pickle garnish

¼ large daikon

50ml Japanese rice vinegar

30g caster sugar

a large pinch of sea salt

1 teaspoon grated yuzu zest or lemon zest, optional

1 dried chilli, optional

3cm piece kombu, optional

For the seasoned flour

150g tempura flour

1 tablespoon cayenne pepper

1 tablespoon shichimi togarashi

1 tablespoon finely ground black pepper

½ tablespoon fine sea salt

First, make the yellow chilli dressing. Put the yellow pepper and chillies directly on the gas hob over a medium-high flame, or over hot coals on a BBQ, and scorch for 5–6 minutes, until the skin is burnt or scorched and flaky. Use metal tongs to turn them around occasionally. Remove from the heat and allow to cool. Peel away the black skin and roughly chop the soft, smoky flesh, seeds and all. Small black specks of charred skin are fine, too. Put the pepper and chilli flesh in a food processor with the remaining dressing ingredients, except the oil, and blend until very smooth. Now, with the motor running, slowly drizzle the oil into the processor, drop by drop, until emulsified. Decant into a glass jar and store in the refrigerator where it will keep for 1 week.

To make the daikon pickle, peel away the outer skin of the daikon, then use a mandoline to shave about 20 slices (if you don’t have a mandoline, just slice the daikon as thinly as possible – about 2mm). Next, put the rice vinegar, sugar and salt in a pan and place over a medium heat. Cook, undisturbed, for 1 minute, until the sugar and salt have dissolved. Remove from the heat and pour the mixture over the daikon slices. Too simple? You can add some yuzu zest and dried chilli to the vinegar mixture when you heat it up. Love umami too? Add a small 3cm square of kombu whilst warming.

Next, prepare the squid. Cut open the squid tubes and lie them flat. Use a sharp knife to score the flesh of the inside of the tubes. Cut each tube in half. You want small, bite-sized pieces that are manageable with chopsticks, so if the squid is on the larger size, cut it into smaller chunks.

To make the seasoned flour, mix all the ingredients by hand. If you have any left, store in an airtight container and it will probably keep for future generations. It’s great used for chicken kara-age or just more squid, or use the same method as noted here with small chunks or strips of chicken or cubes of tofu.

Heat your spanking fresh oil for deep-frying in a fryer or a large pan to 195°C/380°F. Working in batches, massage your prepared squid with a generous, even coating of the seasoned flour making sure you get into every nook and cranny. When you think you’re done, do it again and then sprinkle more seasoned flour over the top. Carefully drop into the hot oil. The squid will cook super-fast, and should be done in around 1 minute. Remove immediately when mildly coloured and drain on a wire rack before transferring to kitchen paper to drain completely.

You can plate up your squid with a layer of the yellow chilli dressing on the base of the plate (like in the photo), or put the sauce in a dipping cup to be enjoyed on the side. Finish plating up with a little mound of daikon pickle, a wedge of lime and some extra sliced chillies if you want a bit of extra chilli kick.



Squid Kara-Age with Yellow Chilli Dressing

SWEET AND SOUR CRAB CRUNCHIES

These crunchy little crab nuggets are pretty much a version of the Japanese korokke, which is a version of the French croquette. In Japan, they have two main types of korokke: one is quite firm and will sometimes contain meat; the other is known as cream korokke and has a far softer, gooier centre. This version is closer to the latter; I’m a huge fan of crunchy on the outside and really soft in the middle.

The sweet and sour element comes by way of the sauce. It’s mega-simple, made up of that loveable Japanese mayo, Kewpie, mixed with some sweet and sour notes. Use whatever crab is freshest and best in your neck of the woods. Remember, perfectly shaped sticks of bright red and white shit wrapped in individual plastic wrap is not a fruit of Neptune’s pantry, it’s the work of the devil. It’s not crab so don’t even think about it!

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

a dash of oil

½ white onion, diced

100g white crabmeat, well picked

60g brown crabmeat, well picked

50ml béchamel sauce

80g cooked and mashed potatoes

a decent splash of light soy sauce

a pinch of shichimi togarashi

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

For the crumb

tempura or plain flour, for coating

1 egg, beaten with a dash of milk

200g panko breadcrumbs

For the sweet and sour dressing

60ml Japanese rice vinegar

40g caster sugar

30ml dark soy sauce

juice of ½ lemon

a pinch of sea salt

100ml Japanese Kewpie mayonnaise

To serve

iceberg lettuce leaves

Place a small pan over a medium heat, add a dash of oil and the diced onion. Sauté for 10 minutes, until softened. Remove from the heat and set aside to cool.

Double check that your crab has no little bits of shell, then use your hands to mix the crabmeat with the béchamel sauce, mashed potatoes, cooked onion, soy sauce, shichimi togarashi and seasoning, until very well combined. Chill in the refrigerator for around 1 hour – this will make it easier to work with.

When well chilled, form the crab mixture into small balls, approximately 30g each. Place on a plate (or tray) lined with clingfilm (to stop the crab balls from sticking) and chill once again for another hour or until very firm.

Next, set up 3 bowls: 1) flour; 2) beaten egg with a dash of milk; 3) breadcrumbs. One by one, roll the balls through the crumbing process, starting with the flour, followed by the egg, then the crumbs, coating them evenly. Put the balls on a tray and freeze for 1 hour or until ready to fry.

While the crab is in the freezer, make your dressing. Whisk together all the dressing ingredients, except the mayo, until the sugar and salt have dissolved. Now, whisk in the mayo vigorously until very well combined. Pour into a glass jar and chill until you are ready to use.

Bring the crab balls out of the freezer a few minutes prior to frying. Set up your fryer with oil so clean that you could almost drink it … mmm. Heat the oil to 180°C/350°F. When the oil is at temperature, carefully drop the balls, in batches, into the hot oil and fry for 3½–4 minutes. Check if they are done by sticking a metal skewer or thin, small knife into the centre of one of the balls to check if it’s totally soft and hot all the way through. If not, continue to fry for another minute, then remove using a perforated scoop.

Serve the crab crunchies immediately on a pile of iceberg lettuce, drizzled with the sweet and sour dressing.



Sweet and Sour Crab Crunchies

BLACK PEPPER SOFT-SHELL CRAB TEMPURA

Soft-shell crab can be a hit or miss type dish. It’s the kind of ingredient that really benefits from cooking the hell out of it. So, when you get it served up and the skin is still a bit chewy and the inner parts are way too wet, with too strong a flavour, I immediately call ‘undercooked’ on that crab. I cook this version twice, once to make sure I’ve cooked it through as much as I need to and then a second time in this thin tempura batter to give it the crunch.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

1 medium soft-shell crab, rinsed well

25g potato starch

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

200ml trisol batter

For the black pepper sauce

5 long red chillies, roughly chopped

7 garlic cloves

2.5cm piece ginger, peeled

1 tablespoon grapeseed oil

100g salted butter

2 tablespoons oyster sauce

2 tablespoons light soy sauce

2 teaspoons dark soy sauce

1 tablespoon caster sugar

1 tablespoon ground black pepper

To serve

pickled ginger

¼ red onion, sliced

½ long green chilli, thinly sliced

lemon wedges

freshly ground black pepper

Start your prep, it can be done well ahead of time. If you are the type of person who gets totally in the shit when you try pulling this off in front of your guests then do it the day before.

Make the black pepper sauce (this can be made 2 days in advance). Purée the chillies, garlic and ginger with the help of a little grapeseed oil until smooth.

Heat a wok and add the butter. Let it melt and start to bubble over a medium heat. Add the purée and fry for 4–5 minutes, until really aromatic and beginning to colour. Add the sauces, sugar and black pepper and cook for 5–6 minutes; the mixture will begin to thicken a little. Remove from the heat and allow to cool completely. Store in the fridge – warning though, if you choose to keep this in a plastic container, the black pepper fragrance will live with you forever.

Drain the crab as best as possible. I usually wrap them up in a load of kitchen paper and use my hands to give them a little press. Dry off once again, and give them a light dredging in potato starch.

Heat the oil in a fryer or large pan to 180°C/350°F. Carefully lower the crab into the hot oil and deep-fry for around 3 minutes. Remove to drain on a wire rack before transferring to kitchen paper to drain completely. Cut the crab into 6 pieces.

Just before you want to eat this, reheat the rapeseed oil in your fryer to 180°C/350°F. Make sure your trisol batter is ice cold – throw a few ice cubes into it and make sure it’s sitting over another bowl or pan of ice water. Dip the pre-fried crab pieces into the cold batter, making sure the batter gets into every little crevice of the crab, and massaging it just to make sure. Fry the crab pieces in the hot oil for about 1½ minutes until golden. Remove from the oil and drain well, again on a wire rack first, then kitchen paper. Serve up as fast as you can – this batter is good and crunchy, but it won’t be this kick ass forever! Scatter the crab pieces over the plate.

As you fry the crab, heat up the black pepper sauce in a small saucepan over a low heat. You may need to add some water to thin it out a bit so that it easily drips away from a spoon. To serve, drizzle a little of the sauce over the crab, and your serving plate. Remember, it’s a fairly intense sauce, so don’t add too much. The whole plate needs to balance. Scatter with the pickled ginger, red onion slices and green chilli – it’s up to you how much you fancy. Grind a little fresh black pepper over the top and serve.

Like other fried seafood dishes, it’s reasonable (and sometimes expected) to serve this with a wedge of lemon.



Black Pepper Soft-Shell Crab Tempura

PUMPKIN TEMPURA

A pretty basic idea, right? You may have even tried small pieces of pumpkin tempura in Japanese restaurants before. However, we are going to turbo charge this fucker. It’s too easy (and usually as boring as hell) to dip some average lacklustre vegetable in some sludgy excuse for a batter then fry it. I’ve had enough of that circus food – here’s a tasty, crunchy bastard that is actually great to eat. The pumpkin gets roasted with some umami-rich additions. It gets cooled down and then fried in the mega-crunchy trisol batter – soft and damn tasty in the middle with the ultimate crunchy exterior. Screw traditions, crunchy rules, bitches!

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

tempura flour, for dusting

200ml trisol batter

For the roast pumpkin

2 wedges best-quality squash or pumpkin (make sure it has an edible skin, such as the Japanese varieties), cut to around 2cm thick at the thickest part (around 175g total)

1 tablespoon salted capers, rinsed and drained

2 anchovy fillets

a large pinch of katsuobushi (bonito flakes)

2 tablespoons dark soy sauce

2 garlic cloves, crushed

1 teaspoon shichimi togarashi

2 tablespoons sake

30g butter, diced

For the pickled pumpkin

25ml Japanese rice vinegar

15g caster sugar

a pinch of sea salt

50g pumpkin, cut into 5–6cm long julienne strips

To serve

½ recipe spicy shiso ponzu

50ml Japanese Kewpie mayonnaise

First, make the roast pumpkin. Preheat the oven to 180°C/160°C fan/Gas Mark 4. Combine all the ingredients so that the pumpkin is fairly well coated. Wrap in an aluminium foil parcel and bake for around 30–35 minutes, or until the pumpkin is roasted at the edges and tender. (The time will vary depending on the pumpkin variety, but be careful and check regularly.) Remove from the oven and allow the pumpkin to cool completely in the foil parcel, then refrigerate until required.

Next, mix the spicy shiso ponzu with the mayonnaise in a bowl and set aside while you make the pickled pumpkin. Combine the vinegar, sugar and salt in a saucepan and place over a medium heat for about 2 minutes, or until the sugar and salt have dissolved. Pour over the pumpkin strips and leave to pickle for at least 30 minutes. Transfer to the refrigerator and chill before serving.

Getting ready to rock… Heat the oil in a fryer or large pan to 180°C/350°F.

Remove the roasted pumpkin from the refrigerator and brush off any capers from the pumpkin pieces. Lightly dredge the pumpkin with the flour, then dip into the batter and coat well. Carefully lower the pumpkin pieces into the hot oil and cook for 1½ minutes, or until golden.

To serve, cut the pumpkin wedges in half and arrange on your sexiest tempura plate with the ponzu mayonnaise and pickled pumpkin in a dipping cup on the side.



Pumpkin Tempura

JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE CHOPSTICKS WITH TRUFFLE PONZU

Chopsticks: a fancy new name for a kind of spring roll, or, as they are known in Japan, harumaki. I used to make these little crackers with a filling made from lightly curried Japanese mushrooms but I was out one day mountain biking and I went flying head first into a tree, at a rather high speed – I was concussed for weeks. It was at that time that I wondered how good the crackers would taste filled with Jerusalem artichokes and truffles. That bump on the head did me good – it’s brilliant, but unfortunately the mushrooms had to find another gig. Make a load of these chopsticks and freeze ’em up. They defrost quickly and fry to a golden crunch in moments, making you look like the master of instant awesomeness when unannounced mo-fos drop in to drink all your booze.

You can buy the pastry online or from specialist shops. If you are really desperate you could use spring roll pastry but I’ll warn you now it will be total crap in comparison and you will cry.

MAKES ABOUT 20

For the filling

60ml light olive oil

1 small white onion, diced

3 garlic cloves, finely chopped

1 teaspoon ground cumin

500g Jerusalem artichokes

lemon wedge, for the artichokes

500ml dry white wine

2 litres dashi

truffle oil, to taste

6 spring onions, finely chopped

50g pickled ginger, finely chopped

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

For the chopsticks

10 sheets feuilles de brick pastry

2 tablespoons cornflour mixed with 2 tablespoons water, to form a paste

1 litre vegetable oil, for deep-frying

chopped chives, to serve, optional

For the truffle ponzu

100ml Japanese mayonnaise

40ml ponzu sauce

1 tablespoon lemon juice

½ teaspoon truffle oil, to taste

Equipment

disposable piping bag

First make the filling. Heat the oil in a pan and sauté your onions, garlic and cumin over a low heat until very soft. Do it slowly, for at least 10 minutes, taking your time in order to build a solid flavour base.

Meanwhile, peel and roughly chop the artichokes and put them in a bowl of water with a wedge of lemon until you’re ready to cook with them (this will stop them from going brown).

When the onions are really soft, drain the chopped artichokes and add them to the pan. Stir to coat them well with the onion mix and sauté over a medium heat for 3 minutes. Add the wine and turn up the heat and allow the liquid to reduce for about 8 minutes, until almost dry. Next, add the dashi, cover the pan and cook for 45–50 minutes; the artichokes need to be nice and soft and the liquid cooked out. Remove from the heat and season with truffle oil, salt and pepper and the chopped spring onions and ginger. Allow to cool completely, then transfer to a container or bowl and refrigerate.

Once chilled, spoon the artichoke mix into a disposable piping bag and cut the pointy end off to leave an 8mm hole. Set aside while you prepare the pastry.

Cut the pastry sheets in half so that you end up with 20 half-moon sheets. Keep them under a damp tea towel while you work. Take a pastry sheet, one at a time, and position it with the straight edge facing you and the round edge facing away. Use a pastry brush to brush the whole sheet with a little of the cornflour mix.

To make the ‘chopsticks’ pipe a long solid line of the artichoke mix parallel to the straight edge, leaving 1cm from the edge. Now, starting at the straight edge, begin rolling the pastry around the artichoke mix. When you get to the curved end, paint a little of the cornflour mix onto the pastry and roll to seal. Place the chopstick on a sheet of baking parchment and continue making the rest. Refrigerate or freeze as soon as possible. These can be stored in the refrigerator for up to 3 days or frozen for up to 2 weeks.

When you’re just about ready to serve, make the truffle ponzu. Mix together all the ingredients and set aside.

Heat the vegetable oil in a fryer or large pan to 180°C/350°F. Deep-fry the chopsticks 2 or 3 at a time for about 2 minutes, or until golden. Remove to drain on a wire rack before transferring to kitchen paper to drain completely. To serve, cut in half and have the truffle ponzu on the side, sprinkled with the chopped chives.



Jerusalem Artichoke Chopsticks with Truffle Ponzu

TEBASAKI GYOZA

In Japan, tebasaki gyoza refers to a chicken wing that has been stuffed, and sometimes crumbed, then fried. You could use gyoza (dumpling) filling as the stuffing. I got to thinking about these crunchy bandits, and being trained in French technique initially as an apprentice, I still revert to thinking about the way of the French from time to time. I made a confit with the wings, removed the bones then crumbed them, but that wasn’t the kind of crunch I wanted. So with French nuttiness on the brain I decided to use feuilles de brick pastry, which despite its name hails from North Africa, or so they say. Anyway, brick was a winner – it kind of loosely resembles gyoza but most importantly it tastes fantastic.

For a tapas or starters portion you only need a few wings but I’d recommend making a larger batch in advance as they keep well.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

2 sheets feuilles de brick pastry

1 tablespoon cornflour mixed with 2 tablespoons water, to form a paste

olive oil, for shallow frying

For the chicken confit

6 corn-fed chicken wings

300g chicken skins

7cm piece kombu

2cm piece ginger, sliced

3 garlic cloves, crushed

3 star anise

sea salt

To serve

a pinch of Japanese sesame seeds

a pinch of sea salt

spicy Korean miso

First, prepare the chicken wings. You only want the middle section so cut off the tip and the bit that connects the wing to the bird. Season the wings with salt, and refrigerate for 1½ hours.

Meanwhile, render some chicken fat for the confit. Place the chicken skins, 4cm of kombu and a large pinch of salt into a large deep pan, and pour over enough cold water to come up to just below the surface of the chicken skins. Cut a sheet of baking parchment to the size of the pan and place it on top of the chicken skins, just touching the surface. Set the pan over a medium heat and allow it to cook gently for about 40 minutes, until golden and crunchy. Remove the pan from the heat, strain while still hot (being very careful) into a bowl and discard the solids.

Preheat the oven to 60°C/40°C fan/Gas Mark very low. (If your oven doesn’t go this low, use a pan on the hob to cook the wings, checking the temperature with a thermometer. You can adjust the heat in order to maintain the optimum temperature, but a little higher or lower won’t be the end of the world.)

Take the wings out of the refrigerator and wipe away the salt. Arrange the wings in a deep roasting tray, then pour over the rendered fat. Add a few slices of ginger, the remaining 3cm of kombu, the garlic cloves and star anise. Cover the tray with foil and cook in the oven for 4 hours. Remove from the oven and leave the wings to cool in the chicken fat. If you’re not using the wings immediately, store in an airtight container, with the fat, in the refrigerator where they will keep for up to 5 days.

When ready for your wings, you need to remove them from the fat and carefully push the bones out – they should pop out quite easily. Trim away any excess cartilage from the ends of the wing and pat dry to remove any excess fat with kitchen paper.

Time to wrap them up …

Take a sheet of the pastry and cut 3 strips around 6cm wide. (Because this pastry comes in rounds, each strip will be a different length.) Stack the strips on top of each other then trim the ends so that they are more or less the same length – you should end up with strips that are around 18cm long. Repeat with the remaining sheet of pastry until you have 6 strips.

Take 1 strip of pastry per wing and brush with a little of the cornflour paste. Place a wing at one end of the pastry and roll to create several layers of pastry. Brush a little more cornflour paste on the join and seal well. Repeat with the remaining pastry and wings, then put them on a tray lined with baking parchment and refrigerate immediately.

To cook, heat the oil in a large pan and shallow fry the gyozas over a medium-high heat for 1½ minutes on each side, or until crunchy and golden. You can fry these ahead of any guests arriving and reheat them in the oven preheated to 190°C/170°C fan/Gas Mark 5 for about 4 minutes.

Crunch the sesame seeds with the sea salt in a mortar and pestle until roughly ground. Serve the gyozas hot with some spicy Korean miso and the sesame-salt mixture sprinkled over the top. Hey yeah!



Tebasaki Gyoza



CREAMY SWEETCORN CROQUETTES IN BROWN CRAB AIOLI (AKA KRABBY PATTIES)

Corn and crab seem to be pretty good mates. To me, this is another way of approaching a ‘surf ’n’ turf’. This dish came about when I was watching SpongeBob SquarePants with my kids. It’s a cool concept: there is a giant crab whose restaurant’s USP is these legendary krabby patties. They look like hamburgers to me. I’m not sure whether they are your usual mystery-meat burger patties or he’s murdering his fellow crabs and turning them into patties. Whatever the case, it’s all mystical underwater fun, nothing really needs a reason. So Jack, my eldest boy, says, ‘Dad, you should serve krabby patties in your restaurants.’ He was so right, what a great idea! I thought, croquettes are so popular in Japan, why not make that the basis of my very own patties. I wanted the crabbiness to be up front and in your face, so I made an aioli with brown crabmeat (Japanese folk call this ‘kani miso’) then drizzled it over some sweet, sweetcorn croquettes. There you have krabby patties, Kurobuta style.

Soundtrack: at the end of one of the SpongeBob films they play ‘Ocean Man’ by Ween, it’s a must whilst you prep this dish!

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

For the croquettes (makes about 12 pieces, they freeze well so you don’t need to be concerned about having any waste)

3 corncobs, husks removed

10g unsalted butter

a squeeze of lemon juice

a dash of soy sauce

15g white crabmeat (not from a can!)

25g brown crabmeat (not from a can!)

35g king crabmeat

50g béchamel sauce

40g cooked and mashed potatoes

15g spring onions, chopped

15g sushi gari, chopped

40g plain flour, for dusting

1 egg, beaten

approx. 150g Japanese panko breadcrumbs

a pinch of sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

For the brown crab aioli

½ teaspoon garlic purée

zest of ½ lemon

1 teaspoon S&B Japanese mustard powder

2 egg yolks

½ tablespoon yuzu kosho (yuzu pepper paste)

a generous pinch of sea salt

1 tablespoon lemon juice

½ tablespoon low-sodium soy sauce

110g brown crabmeat

115ml grapeseed oil

First make the croquettes. Heat a grill pan and char the corncobs over a high heat, until nicely coloured. Take off the heat and toss in a whack of butter, squeeze of lemon juice and splash of soy sauce, whilst still hot. Cover with clingfilm and allow to cool. Cut the kernels from the cob and put half in a food processor or blender to purée until smooth. Mix both the whole corn kernels and puréed corn in a bowl; add the crabmeat, béchamel sauce, mashed potato, spring onion and sushi gari and season with salt and pepper. Chill for 45 minutes to firm the mixture up.

Form the mixture into 20–30g hamburger patties, using flour-dusted hands to shape them. Chill again for at least 30 minutes.

While the patties are chilling, make your brown crab aioli. Whack all the ingredients, except the oil, in a blender or food processor, and blitz well until really smooth. Slowly drizzle in the grapeseed oil, until the mixture has thickened. If it appears too thick for your liking, just drizzle in a little hot water. Go get ’em!

When the patties are nicely chilled, coat them in the flour, then dip them into some beaten egg followed by the breadcrumbs. Chill or freeze your patties again at this point for at least 10 minutes.

When it’s krabby time, set up your fryer with clean oil and heat the oil to 180°C/350°F. When the oil is at temperature, carefully drop the patties (in batches if necessary) into the hot oil and fry for 2½ minutes. Check if they are done by sticking a metal skewer or thin, small knife into the centre of one of the patties to check if it’s totally cooked and hot all the way through. If not, continue to fry for another minute, then remove using a perforated scoop.

Drain well on kitchen paper and serve with a massive dollop of brown crab aioli, or, get the aioli into a squeezy bottle and get artistic, squirting it all over your patties.



Creamy Sweetcorn Croquettes in Brown Crab Aioli (Aka Krabby Patties)

ANAGO TEMPURA WITH STICKY STAR ANISE SAUCE

As far as popular Japanese eel dishes go, unagi kabayaki, the sweet, grilled freshwater eel, takes centre stage. You’ll see it teamed with its good mates – various sushi preparations or donburi – or going it solo with a side of extra sweet, sticky soy and sansho pepper. Anago, salt water eel, could be thought of as the red-headed stepchild of the eel. It’s just as good, but it still sits in the shadow of its rock star relation, unagi.

So let’s pimp our anago. Buy it pre-grilled from Japanese food shops – don’t substitute it with some other weird shit like English jellied eels or that smoky stuff those nuts, the Dutch, make. This recipe is for anago. The recipe for the sauce will make more than you need, but I’d recommend making the full batch as it will keep in the fridge until the end of time. Plus, it’s great to barbecue chicken with, drizzle over maki rolls or, if you lose your marbles, drizzle over your cornflakes. Along with the sticky star anise sauce, this dish is quite rich, so serve it as part of a tapas feast.

Serves 2 as part of a 7–8 plate tapas feast

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

120g anago, cut into 5–6cm strips, 1–1½cm thick

tempura flour, for dusting

200ml ice-cold trisol batter

For the sticky star anise sauce

400ml sake

370ml mirin

370ml light soy sauce

2 tablespoons tamari

65g caster sugar

6 pieces star anise, toasted in a dry pan

To serve

4cm piece daikon, finely shredded

½ medium carrot, finely shredded

¼ large cucumber, finely shredded

small knob ginger, finely grated

½ lime, cut into wedges

sansho pepper, to sprinkle

First make the sauce by combining the ingredients in a small saucepan. Mix well, place over a very low heat and cook gently for 1 hour, until thickened. Don’t allow the mixture to boil as this will result in an astringent sauce. Be very patient. Set aside while you prepare the rest of the dish.

Put the finely shredded daikon, carrot and cucumber in ice-cold water to cover and leave for 1 hour to get them nice and crisp.

Next, heat enough clean oil for deep-frying in a fryer or large pan to 180°C/350°F. Lightly dust your anago strips with tempura flour and shake off the excess. In ice-cold batter, dip in the anago, piece by piece, then gently swish it into the hot oil. Flick a little extra batter over the frying strips of anago for some extra crunchy goodness and let these little buggers fry for around 2 minutes, until nice and golden. And yes, purists, you’re absolutely right, traditional tempura is never ‘golden’ in appearance. Traditional tempura is also never crunchy, and I’m into the crunch, enough said. When done, put the fried anago on a wire rack and transfer to tempura paper (or kitchen paper), which will absorb any excess oil.

Drain the finely shredded vegetables well.

To serve, place your anago together with a small mound of the grated ginger, lime and the finely shredded vegetables on a plate. Sprinkle the whole plate lightly with sansho pepper. Remove the star anise from the sauce and serve (at room temperature) on the side.



Anago Tempura with Sticky Star Anise Sauce