BASICS AND SUPPLIERS



BECHAMEL SAUCE

MAKES 50ML

1 white onion

2 bay leaves

5 cloves

1.5 litres full-cream milk

200g salted butter

200g plain flour

Peel the onion, cut it in half, and pin a bay leaf to each half using the cloves.

Put the onion in a saucepan with the milk, and bring to the boil. Remove from the heat and allow to cool. Strain and discard the solids.

Melt the butter over a medium heat, stir in the flour and continue to cook for about 7 minutes, or until the mixture becomes light golden in colour.

Little by little, pour the milk into the flour mixture, until well combined, stirring the entire time. Cook, continuing to stir constantly, for a further 2–3 minutes.

Remove from the heat and allow to cool to room temperature, then chill with a layer of cling film directly on top of the mixture if not using immediately. It keeps for a day or so as long as it’s in an airtight container and clingfilmed well to ensure it stays fresh.

DEN MISO

MAKES 160ML

90g brown miso paste

50g caster sugar

40ml mirin

40ml sake

Whisk all the ingredients together to make a smooth sauce. If you’re making a larger batch, use a blender to do this.

Create a water bath by filling a pan with water and sitting a heatproof bowl snugly over the top (making sure the bottom of the bowl doesn’t touch the water). Pour the sauce into the bowl and cook over a high heat for about 20 minutes, stirring continuously. Remove, cool down, chill and use for marinades and sauces as necessary.

DASHI

It is difficult to give an exact recipe for dashi. Firstly, water is different everywhere. In London, for example, the water from the tap is reportedly recycled six or seven times, it’s hard water and not at all acceptable for dashi. Filtering it helps, but for consistency it’s best to use softer bottled water, like Volvic.

Secondly, the kombu available to me may not be the same standard or strength as the one available to you. But most importantly, the katsuobushi – the mould-cured, smoked and dried bonito that we most often purchase ready shaved – has a tendency to dry out, almost on a daily basis. Store katsuobushi outside at room temperature for too long and it begins to over-dry and weaken in flavour. There is also a huge array of qualities available from pale yellow old stuff to bright pink, recently shaved and still full of life. Of course, if you were to produce your own shaving block, a katsuobushi-bako, and kept your own lump of unshaven katsuobushi then you, in our real world (that means many kitchens of Japan), would shave what you need daily, wrap up the block in a dark cloth and get it back into the fridge to preserve what moisture it has left. Same goes for the pre-shaved packs of bonito flakes or katsuobushi. Seal the pack or transfer to an airtight container and keep it refrigerated.

So, here is a rough guide. Again, as this has only three very important yet variable ingredients you will no doubt need to experiment a little until you’ve struck the right cord.

MAKES ABOUT 2 LITRES

30cm piece kombu, white powdery substance wiped away with a damp cloth

3 litres cold, bottled or filtered water

2–3 handfuls (at least) of katsuobushi (bonito flakes) – if using old, yellowy stuff you’ll need another 1 or 2 more handfuls

Put the kombu and water in a pan and heat to 60°C/140°F. Skim away any impurities that surface (white foamy stuff) and cook for about 10 minutes. Remove from the heat and allow to infuse for about 30 minutes. (Continue to skim as necessary.)

Remove the kombu and reserve it for a pickle or condiment.

Gently pick up the katsuobushi (so you don’t break or crush it) and scatter it over the surface of the kombu-infused water. Infuse at 60°C/140°F for 15 minutes and then strain through a muslin cloth into a bowl.

Take the muslin that is now filled with the strained katsuobushi and tie it up so that you have a big katsuobushi tea bag. Put it into the cooling dashi to add a bit of an extra flavour boost known as ‘oigatsuo’.

Allow the dashi to cool to room temperature. Taste. If you’re happy with the flavour remove the katsuobushi tea bag, but if you’re looking for more umami meatiness from your stock, leave it in all day. The dashi will keep for a few days in the fridge, but as with all things, fresh is best.

KIMCHI MAYO

MAKES 1 LARGE JAR

560g mayonnaise

70g commercial kimchi base

35g garlic purée

1 tablespoon tobanjan (chilli bean paste)

juice of 3 limes

Combine all the ingredients together in a bowl until well mixed.

KIMCHI PICKLE

Sometimes referred to as Asian sauerkraut, as although kimchi is spicier than sauerkraut, they are both fermented with help from lacto-bacteria. Kimchi normally takes a couple of weeks to ferment but in my kitchens we don’t have enough space to continually work two weeks ahead, so I came up with the recipe below, which can be made in just over a day. Kimchi is Korean by tradition but it seems to be cropping up everywhere. I once had it in a savoury pancake (okonomiyaki) in Tokyo; that was some seriously good kimchi. Sometimes I use it to make a mayo, or serve it as a pickle on its own or with shrimp tempura and in maki rolls.

MAKES 750ML–1 LITRE

1 head Chinese cabbage

80g fine sea salt

30g soft light brown sugar

1 long cucumber, halved, deseeded, then cut into 5mm-thick half-moons

25g garlic cloves, thinly sliced

25g ginger, peeled and grated

20g dried shrimp (soaked in cold water for 1 hour), finely chopped

1 teaspoon shichimi togarashi

100g commercial kimchi base

2–3 dried red chillies, roughly broken up

Cut the cabbage lengthways into quarters, and mix with the salt and sugar – pour the salt and sugar over and in between the leaves, covering the surfaces of each leaf as much as possible. Leave at room temperature for 3 hours.

Wash the cabbage well and then drain. Don your hygienic rubber gloves because the mixture is incredibly spicy and you’re going to be using your hands. Mix all the remaining ingredients in a large bowl, and then the mixture between each leaf and any excess over the top. Cover with clingfilm, poke a few holes through it to let the gasses out, and leave it at room temperature for 3 hours, before refrigerating for 20 hours. Chop it up into pieces you could manage with chopsticks and eat up!

Keep well refrigerated, it will carry on maturing. Only you can decide when enough is enough.

NANBAN ZUKE BASE

MAKES 200ML

140ml dashi

3 tablespoons Japanese rice vinegar

1 tablespoon light soy sauce

1 tablespoon mirin

2 teaspoons caster sugar

2 small dried red chillies (available from Japanese food stores sold as takanotsume)

1 medium onion, halved and thinly sliced

Combine all the ingredients in a pan and bring to a simmer. Remove from the heat and set aside to cool. Chill in the refrigerator where it will last for up to 1 month.

If you like, coat a few chunks of fish or chicken in some potato starch, fry until golden brown, then add them to the nanban zuke base. Lightly simmer for 2 minutes, remove and allow to cool before refrigerating. Eat chilled in the summer … what a beauty!

PONZU SAUCE

MAKES 165ML

100ml Japanese rice vinegar

50ml dark soy sauce

15ml lemon juice

Combine all the ingredients. That’s it. It’s a good idea to let it mature at room temperature for 2 weeks, and then keep it in the fridge where it will keep for many months.

PUFFED SOBA

MAKES 70G

20g Japanese soba grains (I use Japanese soba grains, other versions won’t work for this. As an alternative, use sushi rice)

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

If you don’t have a dehydrator, preheat your oven to its lowest setting.

Fill a pan with cold water and bring to the boil. Add the soba grains and cook for 8–10 minutes, over a medium heat, until quite soft, even slightly overcooked. Drain and then rinse in cold water.

Next, dehydrate the grains in your dehydrator, or if you’re using your oven, spread the soba on a baking tray lined with parchment and bake until hard enough to break your teeth. Remove and set aside while you heat up the oil for deep-frying.

Heat the oil in a fryer or large pan to 220°C/425°F. Add the soba grains, in small batches, and flash fry them. They will puff immediately so you’ll need to work quickly. Remove with a perforated spoon, drain on kitchen paper and keep in a warm, dry place. That’s it!

QUICK CUCUMBER PICKLES

About 10cm of your favourite cucumber variety

For the amazu

100ml Japanese rice vinegar

75g caster sugar

6g salt

2cm kombu

First make the amazu. Warm the ingredients together to dissolve the sugar and salt – do not boil. Take off the heat and allow to cool before keeping in the fridge until required.

About 10 minutes before you want to serve, slice the cucumber super-thinly using a Japanese mandoline (watch your fingers!). Place your cucumber slices in a bowl and pour over enough amazu to barely cover. Leave to steep for 10 minutes.

You got pickles. Mr Pickles would also be a great name for a cat…

SPICY KOREAN MISO

MAKES 90ML

100g gochujang (fermented chilli paste)

20ml rice vinegar

2 teaspoons sake

15g caster sugar

10g white miso paste

1 egg yolk

Make the spicy Korean miso by whisking together all the ingredients except the egg yolk in a pan. Gently cook over a very low heat for 10 minutes.

Remove from the heat and whisk in the egg yolk. Set aside and allow to cool. It will keep refrigerated for weeks on end.

SPICY SHISO PONZU

MAKES 100ML

20g finely diced red onion

5g finely diced red chilli, seeds and membrane discarded

35ml shiso vinegar

juice of ½ plump juicy lime

4 fresh shiso leaves, finely shredded (can’t find shiso? Replace with 6–8 mint leaves)

4 teaspoons green Tabasco sauce (can you use red instead? No way!)

2 teaspoons grapeseed oil

Combine all the ingredients and whisk vigorously with a fork. This doesn’t keep well, so make it right before using.

SUSHI RICE

This recipe is based on new crop Tamanishiki sushi rice. Generally, the newer the rice, the less water is required to cook it. As rice gets older, it continues to dry out more, hence older rice needing more water. It’s well worth doing a test batch to see how much water you need for your perfect recipe. And remember this will change with different batches of rice, so keep an eye on it.

MAKES 750G COOKED RICE

500g sushi rice

500ml filtered water

125ml shari-su (see below)

For the shari-su

200ml red rice vinegar

120g caster sugar

1 teaspoon salt

8cm kombu

The shari-su can be made in advance and stored in a sealed container at room temperature until ready to use.

Over a low heat, warm all the shari-su ingredients until the sugar and salt dissolve. Take off the heat and cool to room temperature. Strain off the kombu and store until needed.

Wash the rice thoroughly by placing it inside a strainer that fits inside a bowl and put it under a tap with cold running water. Gently move the rice about once in a while to loosen up the white polishing compound. You’re aiming to achieve clear running water and this will take around 20–25 minutes of rinsing for this amount of rice. Allow the rice to drain off in the colander for at least 30 minutes before cooking.

Put the rice into an electric rice cooker, pour in the filtered water, clamp down the lid and hit the cook button. The rice cooker will magically switch off once the rice is cooked – about 25 minutes. Alternatively, use the absorption method to cook the rice on the hob.

Immediately lift the rice cooker insert out of the machine and dump it upside down into a wooden sushi seasoning tub (AKA hangiri). If you don’t have one of these, buy one. If you don’t use this, expect your rice to be a bit more gluggy. The reason for using a wooden tub is that the wood absorbs excess moisture.

Using a flat rice paddle (shamoji) spread the rice out evenly, right up to the edge. Pour the shari-su over the top of the rice paddle so that it splashes onto the rice in smaller droplets – this allows for more even dispersion. Move the paddle around so that the vinegar gets to all of the rice.

Using a sideways cutting-like motion, push and fold the rice so that the vinegar is mixed in as evenly as possible. Cover with a damp cloth until required.

TRISOL BATTER

MAKES 875ML

250g tempura flour

200g trisol powder

8g caster sugar

8g sea salt

8g fresh yeast

475ml iced water (remove the ice cubes before use)

To make the trisol batter, whisk the flour and trisol powder together and then mix in the sugar and salt.

In a small bowl, dissolve the yeast in the iced water, and then whisk into the dry mix. Cover with clingfilm and let the mixture prove in a warm place for 2 hours. Refrigerate for a further 2 hours then it’s ready to use.

UNAGI SAUCE

MAKES ABOUT 175ML

½ unagi kabayaki (sweet grilled eel), chopped into chunks

120ml sake

40g caster sugar

25ml tamari soy sauce

10g liquid glucose, plus extra if required

Combine all the ingredients in a heatproof bowl over a pan of just simmering water (don’t allow the bowl to touch the water) and cook for 2 hours. The mix should be slightly thickened, but if you prefer it to be even thicker, add a little bit more glucose. Reducing the sauce will add a slightly more bitter characteristic.

YUZU KOSHO MAYO

MAKES 1 SMALL JAR

250g mayonnaise

2 tablespoons yuzu kosho (yuzu pepper paste)

5 teaspoons lime juice

2 tablespoons finely chopped spring onions, green and white parts

Combine all the ingredients together in a bowl until well mixed.
