    How to
Cook Meat
C H R I S S C H L E S I N G E R and
                      JOHN WILLOUGHBY
         To Roscoe, Jake, and Sherman,
true connoisseurs of finely prepared meat
                                                            CONTENTS




     Acknowledgments         v




Introduction:

ALL THE MEAT THAT’S FIT TO EAT                                   1



THE STOCK EXCHANGE: Real Kitchen Solutions                      31



BEEF: AMERICA’S MEAT                                            35



VEAL: GUE SS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                           159



LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                               241



PORK: SWINE OF THE TIME S                                      319



FAVORITE CLASSIC SIDE DISHE S                                  407



HOBO PACKS                                                     439



     Index       445

     Other Books by Chris Schlesinger and John Willoughby

     Credits

     Cover

     Copyright

     About the Publisher
                              ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




As usual, there are more people who helped make this book than we can possibly thank, but
we want to single out a few.

From Chris
Thanks to the staff at my restaurants for taking up the slack so I had the time to do this
book. At the East Coast Grill, I’d particularly like to thank Maureen Rubino, my general
manager; her assistant, Erin; Owen Tilly, the chef; as well as Eric, Seth, Elmer, Amilcar, and
all the rest of the staff. At the Back Eddy, my thanks to general manager Sal Liotta and chef
Aaron DeRego along with Nigel, Brian, and the rest of the gang. I’d also like to thank
Jimmy Burke and Bob Kinkead, my pals, mentors, and colleagues through the years, for all
the teaching, eating, drinking, and laughing. And ﬁnally thanks to my coauthor, Doc, for his
ability, agility, and intestinal fortitude and for tolerating a sometimes petulant, sometimes
confused, and always lazy partner. As usual, a pleasure and an honor.

From John (Doc)
Thanks to all of my colleagues at Cook’s Illustrated magazine, and in particular Chris
Kimball, Jack, Kay, Adam, Barbara, Amy, Dawn, Julia, India, Bridget, and Henrietta for their
support and tolerance. Thanks to Mark Bittman for his ever-present comradeship and inspi­
ration. And, of course, thanks to my coauthor, Chris, for his alacrity, perspicacity, all-
around ebullience, and ability to put up with my irksome habits and occasionally alarmist
nature. The pleasure and honor, truly, are mine.

From both of us
Our thanks to Nancy Kohl and Kirsten Mikalson, without whom this book would not
exist—their hard work, diligence, and ability to tolerate ever-changing surface conditions
     on the road to completion were essential and guarantee them a bright future in this busi­
     ness; to Kay Rentschler, not only for her indispensable help in the conceptual formulation
     of this book but also for her expertise in the ﬂavors of the Austro-Hungarian Empire; to our
     indefatigable agent Doe Coover, an evergreen source of inspiration and encouragement; to
     her colleague Frances, for always taking our calls cheerfully no matter how grumpy we
     might be; to Doug Bellow, Dana Van Gorder, Carl Taplin, Tom Huth, and in particular
     Michael Otten for testing and retesting our recipes in their home kitchens.
             At HarperCollins, thank to our original editor, Justin Schwartz, for helping translate
     our eager enthusiasm into what we hope is a useful book; to the ultimate closer, Harriet
     Bell, for her drive and vision; to Adrian Zackheim for his support and his inspirational dis­
     play of two-ﬁsted eating at the East Coast Grill last February; to Leah Carlson-Stanisic for
     making a complicated concept into a clear and readable design; and to Judith Sutton for
     coralling our errors.
             Thanks also to John Dewar, the world’s ﬁnest butcher, for his patient guidance at our
     early morning sessions; to Paul Derber, supplier of high-quality meats, for his lucid expla­
     nations; to Dr. Terry Dockerty and the National Cattlemen’s Beef Association for gener­
     ously allowing us to use their expert photographs of various cuts of beef, pork, lamb, and
     veal; to the National Livestock and Meat Board for putting out clear, concise, and helpful
     guides that are worth their weight in gold to anyone who wants to know even more about
     meat; and to Dave Grifﬁn of Texas A&M University for organizing and presenting the
     highly informative Beef 101 course.
             Finally, thanks to our extended family—Rick, Susan, Tommy, Lizzie, Steve, and
     Chris’s wife, Marcy, for their unwavering love and friendship.




vi   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
                                                                        I N T R O D U C T I O N




                                         T H E M E AT
                                                All

                                T H AT ’ S F I T t o E AT

L    et’s face it, meat tastes great. From steaks to chops, ribs to

roasts, it has a direct, hits-you-where-you-live appeal that cannot be

denied.
       So it’s no surprise that when we think of our favorite food experiences, meat usually
played the major role. Eating that ﬁrst super-ﬂavorful fat-edged prime rib as a young boy
was a culinary rite of passage. Then there was the ﬁrst spit-roasted whole pig, the crackling-
crisp skin contrasting beautifully with the rich, buttery, smoky tendrils of the inner meat. A
roast leg of lamb, slathered with a paste of garlic, rosemary, and lemon juice, was the clear­
est memory of a childhood trip to Greece. And how many times have we celebrated a gor­
geous summer day with a cold beer and a perfectly grilled double-thick T-bone steak, rich
and juicy inside and charred just right on the outside?
       Obviously, we love meat. And with this book, we want to share that love with you,
to give you an even deeper appreciation of the ﬂavor that you already savor—because red
meat is a bedrock part of our culinary heritage, a taste that is right down in our genes.
       But we’re not blind to all the nutritional information that is going around today con­
cerning red meat. We agree that the typical American diet probably includes too much of
it. In fact, that’s how this book got started in the ﬁrst place. We were concerned about our
own meat consumption and decided to try to make the meat we ate really count. This had



                                                                                                  1
    the ironic effect of raising our appreciation and our dedication to proper preparation of
    meat. Once we gave up the lousy ham sandwiches and the fast-food burgers, we found our­
    selves becoming more enamored of not only roasts and steaks, but also some of the over­
    looked and less popular cuts. Pretty soon cuts like short ribs, veal breast, and fresh ham
    began to gain ground as new favorites.
            When we started exploring meat in this way, it led us to both rediscovering some old
    classics and appreciating the way meat is used in other cultures, where the roasts and steaks
    of European-derived cuisines are almost unknown. This opened up a whole new world to
    us, and we want to share that world with you. We want to share the classic cuts, we want to
    share the international favorites, and we want to share the overlooked cuts, the unpolished
    gems of the meat world.
            At the same time, we want to teach you how to cook every cut exactly right. Because
    if you’re going to eat less meat, then it’s even more important that you derive maximum
    enjoyment from every experience.
            There’s actually a lot to be said for red meat in a nutritional context too. It remains
    the single most nutrient-dense, efﬁcient food delivery system available to human beings. It
    contains all the essential amino acids (those are the ones that our bodies need but cannot
    synthesize from other foods) and, more important, it contains each in exactly the propor­
    tion that our bodies require it. Red meat is also an unrivaled source of iron and crucial trace
    elements such as zinc and copper, along with vitamins B6 and B12. As for saturated fat, many
    cuts are leaner these days, and even within current nutritional guidelines you can eat ten
    ounces of lean red meat every day and not exceed the recommended fat intake.
            Meat is also a core part of the human experience, intricately intertwined with our
    history as a species. Hunter-gatherers weren’t hunting for vegetables, after all, and the need
    to band together to hunt for meat was the primary motivation for the early social bonds
    that eventually created civilization. Anthropologists vary in their estimation as to whether
    the eating of meat represents humans’ desire to show their power over animals or to iden­
    tify with them, but they all agree that it has a deep-seated relevance to our understanding of
    our place in the natural world.
            As Americans, we are particularly meat-oriented, because our country has perhaps
    the most consummate carnivore history of all. Native Americans had always hunted and
    eaten meat, and European settlers took to the practice with a passion. In their native coun­
    tries meat had for the most part been a privilege of wealth. But in this new land, game was
    astonishingly plentiful, and with the vast amount of land available, the new Americans
    began raising both cattle and hogs in large quantities. Europeans who visited colonial
    America consistently marveled at the amount of meat consumed by the average citizen.
    Like rice in much of Asia, meat became the center of our national dinner plate.
            The odd thing, though, is that despite its prominent place in our national diet, many
    of us don’t know all that much about meat anymore.
            During the culinary revolution that has swept the United States over the past couple
    of decades, the greatest attention has been paid to products once less commonplace in the
    American kitchen. Greens, grains, and vegetables of all kinds have rightfully been praised,



2   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
explained, and brought to a well-deserved place of greater signiﬁcance on our plates. But
that led to a certain amount of indifference about some aspects of meat cookery. We know
about steaks and chops, and we have some idea about roasts, but braises and stews and
many lesser-known cuts have fallen into disrepute or neglect.
         As a result, most Americans tend to go to the grocery store and pick out the same
cuts of meat they always have, then take them home and cook them the same way their
parents did. This is a shame, both because meat has changed in character and because folks
are losing out on a whole world of excellent culinary opportunities. It is our fond hope that
this book will help remedy that.
         To that end, part of what we want to do with this book is to help expand your meat
horizons. Steaks are wonderful, but we want to enjoy rich, ﬂavorful stews simmering on
the stove as well as juicy roasts coming out of the oven, hearty braised meat dishes and
smoky grilled chops with spicy salsas. We want to eliminate the false notion that there is a
hierarchy of meats. Stew meat is not worse than tenderloin, it’s just different. If you cook it
right, it can become a dish that is every bit as enticing and satisfying in its own way as a suc­
culent ﬁlet mignon. Remember that a hierarchy of price does not really reﬂect a hierarchy
of value; it’s all a matter of knowing which cut should be matched with which cooking
method.
         When you start looking at meat this way you not only end up with some outstand­
ing food, you get some side beneﬁts along the way as well. The less highly regarded cuts of
meat tend to be less expensive, for one thing. For another, they allow you to feel virtuous,
because you are being a responsible consumer by using all the resources the animal has to
offer, rather than just a select few. Besides all that, these cuts are fun to cook. For a better
idea of what we’re talking about here, check out our Top 5 Favorite Cuts in the recipe chap­
ter for each meat. There are some super-expensive cuts in those lists, for sure, but you’ll also
ﬁnd some of these unpolished gems. We’re big fans of pork butts, for example, we love
shoulder lamb chops, and we’re excited about beef skirt steaks. These types of overlooked
cuts are, we believe, one of the real strengths of this book.
         The bottom line is that this book is a celebration of meat. We want to help you get
the most out of it and enjoy every aspect of it, from buying it to cooking it to eating it. We
want to be sure that every time you bring a meat dish to the table, it more than satisﬁes
your memories and your expectations.
         What better place to start than at the meat counter?


       MEET MEAT

       There is a lot of good meat out there, and there are a lot of neat, fun, and tasty
ways to cook it. So, walking up to the meat counter should be an occasion for excitement.
But even for an experienced cook, it can often be a prelude to bewilderment instead.
       And why not? At any given time, there are about a hundred and ﬁfty separate cuts of
red meat on display in the meat section of an average large supermarket. Not only that, but



                                                          A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   3
    the same cut may have a different name depending on the state, the city, or even the partic­
    ular shop where you’re buying it. Some differences are geographic. Until recently, for
    instance, butchers in Kansas City called the boneless top loin steak a Texas strip, while those
    in Texas (and much of the rest of the country) referred to it as a New York strip, and in New
    York, they called it a Kansas City strip. Other cuts of meat, like Boston butt and picnic
    shoulder, derive their names from butchering practices of the distant past. There are also
    plenty of local names that were coined simply because they’re more enticing than the more
    “clinical” names. In much of the South, for instance, the beef chuck neck pot roast is
    known as a bell roast because it comes from the part of the neck where the cow’s bell used
    to hang. All in all, meat industry experts estimate that there are over a thousand different
    names used for the three hundred or so standard cuts of red meat in this country.
            So, the real question is, how do we make sense of all this?
            Well, clearly there’s no way you can learn every local name for every cut of red
    meat. And since language tends to evolve, it’s very likely that people are going to keep on
    making up new names for cuts of meat as the years go by. We’ve tried to make the whole
    situation as clear as possible by giving you lists of all the names these cuts are presently
    known by, plus pictures of all of them as they look in the market. But it’s also very helpful
    to learn a few basic characteristics of the various parts of the animals. That way you can
    make good use of the standard labels applied to packaged cuts of meat in almost every mar­
    ket in this country—and you will also know which cooking method works with which cut.


           THE BIG PICTURE

            Here’s the story, generally speaking.
            When an animal is butchered, it is ﬁrst separated into a number of large sections
    called the “primal cuts.” These are then broken down into smaller sections known as “sub­
    primals,” and the subprimals in turn are divided into retail cuts—steaks, chops, roasts, and
    all the rest.
            But of course you won’t see these primal cuts in the supermarket. Instead, you’ll see
    all those individual retail cuts into which the primals are ultimately separated—the roasts,
    steaks, brisket, and so on.
            So how do you put these two together? Well, we’re going to try to make it easy for
    you, because it actually can be pretty complicated. I (Chris) remember being in culinary
    school trying to ﬁgure out where all the dozens of different cuts of beef came from on the
    cow and becoming increasingly confused, along with most of my classmates. To make it
    clearer, our instructor followed a pedagogical plan that is used in cooking schools all over
    the country—he tried to relate the parts of the cow to parts of the human body. As gross as
    it may seem, it was pretty effective. I told the instructor that he should get a raincoat and
    paint it with a diagram showing which part of his body translated to which part of the cow,
    then put it on whenever we started talking about beef cuts.
            Even today, though, after all the years I’ve spent cutting up and cooking beef, I can



4   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
still get confused about what cut comes from which part of the steer. In an effort to simplify
this, to make it less abstruse, less obtuse, and generally easier to remember, we recommend
you divide each animal into four basic parts and then give each of them a descriptive name.
So, for example, we like to divide the steer into the chuck, which we call the Tough But
Flavorful section; the rib, or Big Money Section; the loin, which we dub the Steak Section;
and the round, known to us as the Roast Section.
         Of course, this is an oversimpliﬁcation with plenty of exceptions and qualiﬁcations,
but that’s how we think of the animal, and it’s actually pretty helpful in keeping things
straight. Why bother, you ask? Well, because many of the ﬂavor and texture characteristics of
a particular cut of meat are determined by the primal cut it comes from. The less exercise a
particular part of an animal gets, the more tender the cuts from that part of the animal are
going to be. For all four-legged animals, the back, which includes the rib and loin sections,
does the least work in moving the animal around and so is the most tender. The most tender
part of the animal overall is the section just to the front of the loin, known as the rib section,
which produces the prime rib roast. The loin yields those incredibly tender steaks—the
porterhouse, the T-bone, the ﬁlet mignon, the New York strip. Next on the descending ten­
derness scale comes the sirloin, which is the part between the loin and the rump. Cuts from
the leg and hip (the round) are made up of larger muscles with little fat and a good amount of
connective tissue, so they are not all that tender while cuts from the shoulder and neck of the
animal are, for the most part, tougher yet. Meat that comes from the foreshank, breast, and
side is usually the gnarliest of all.


                       BEEF                                              LAMB
     Chuck
                Rib                                    Shoulder
                         Loin
                                                                  Rib or Rack   Loin
                                            Round
                                                                                         Leg (Round)




        Brisket/Plate/Flank                               Shank/Breast




                       VEAL                                              PORK



     Shoulder
                Rib or Rack     Loin   Leg (Round)    Shoulder Butt
                                                                             Loin
                                                                                               Ham (Leg)




                                                                                    Spareribs/Belly
        Shank/Breast                                       Picnic Shoulder




                                                           A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT    5
            Now for the cooking methods. Tender cuts are best cooked with dry-heat methods
    like grilling, sautéing, roasting, and broiling, while tougher cuts do best with moist-heat
    methods like braising and stewing.
            Put these two dynamics together and it means that, in general, cuts from the loin
    and rib are usually grilled, sautéed, roasted, or broiled; cuts from the leg are often roasted
    and sometimes braised or stewed; cuts from the shoulder are often braised or stewed and
    sometimes roasted; and cuts from the foreshank, breast, and side are most often braised or
    stewed.
            Of course, within these general parameters there are many levels of complication.
    We delve into those in the section of each recipe labeled “The Cut.” But in general, these
    guidelines hold pretty ﬁrm.


                                       BEEF Short Loin Steaks and Roasts




          LAMB Loin Chops and Roasts                                   VEAL Loin Chops and Roasts




                                            PORK Loin Chops and Roasts




6   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
        In trying to explain all of this, we’ve found it helpful to compare cuts taken from
the same sections of different animals. So let’s look at a cut taken from the loin section,
also known as the short loin. Let’s take the beef porterhouse steak as our point of com­
parison. From the other three animals, the equivalent cut would be the veal, lamb, or pork
loin chop. All four cuts are very tender, all four have portions of two separate muscles sep­
arated by a bone, and all four are best cooked with direct dry-heat methods such as grilling
or broiling.
        It gets more complicated than this for other sections of the animals, but the point is
the same: If you understand the way the cut from one animal works, you basically under­
stand them all.
        Once you have this down, you can learn a lot from the labels on packages of meat in
the supermarket. A few years ago in an attempt to cut down on the confusion about which
cut is what, the National Livestock and Meat Board came out with label standards that are
increasingly used around the country. In large type—usually at the bottom of the label,
below the weight, price per pound, total price, and sell-by date—you will ﬁnd the type of
meat (e.g., pork), the primal cut from which the particular cut came (e.g., loin), and the
name of the particular cut (e.g., tenderloin roast). So, in the case of this example, you know
that this comes from a part of the animal that is very tender—and therefore should be
cooked using a dry-heat method like grilling or roasting.
        The dynamic of matching meat to method is so crucial to cooking meat right that
we have organized this whole book around it. For each of the four types of meat, the
recipes are divided by the size and texture of the cuts. The categories include “Large
Tender” cuts such as loin and rib roasts; “Large Tough” cuts such as shoulder roasts and
brisket; “Small Tender” cuts such as chops and steaks; and “Small Tough” cuts, which for
the most part refer to stew meat, usually taken from the shoulder or leg. (The organ meats
such as liver or sweetbreads, also known as offal, have their own separate category.) Most of
the cuts of meat within each category are cooked with the same cooking method.


       N EG LECTE D G E M S

        But as with any set of rules, this one has exceptions. Here you will ﬁnd many of the
neglected and underused cuts, the undiscovered gems of meat cookery that bring surpris­
ing rewards to the intrepid cook who seeks them out.
        To show you what we mean, let’s take a look at another section of all four animals,
the upper section of the shoulder. Despite the fact that most cuts from the shoulder are
relatively tough and need long, slow cooking, there are a couple of cuts here that are actu­
ally excellent for grilling. They are the beef, veal, and pork blade steaks and the lamb blade
chop. They all come from the top of the shoulder near the neck, and they all have the same
deep, rich ﬂavor as other cuts from this part of the animal, but they are also tender enough
to go on the grill. Since not many people know about them, they are also very inexpensive.
These blade cuts are particular favorites of Chris’s because they are the continuation of
the rib, the most expensive section of each animal. Now, the muscles from the rib area



                                                        A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   7
    don’t stop just because they move into the shoulder; they merely begin to change some­
    what in character. So the ﬁrst couple of blade lamb chops next to the rib, for instance, are
    actually very similar to your high-priced rib lamb chops, with a little more chew but a lot
    smaller price tag.




         BEEF Blade Steaks and Roasts                             LAMB Blade Chops and Roasts




        VEAL Blade Steaks and Roasts                              PORK Blade Steaks and Roasts




           These types of cuts are among the most fun as well as the most rewarding to cook,
    and as we go through each animal, we’ll point them out to you. Put them together with the
    more well known popular cuts, and you’re going to have a meat repertoire that will keep
    you going for a long time.




8   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
       MAKING A CHOICE

       Let’s say you know that you’re going to be grilling, which calls for a small tender
cut of meat, and you want to buy a really good chop or steak to throw on the ﬁre. How do
you go about picking one?
       There are several factors that go into making this choice. You may want to consider
the grade of the meat, you deﬁnitely need to check out its physical appearance, you might
want to consider “brand,” and you should decide whether you will look for it in a super­
market or at a butcher shop.


       G RAD E S OF M EAT

        The grading of meat is a concept that most people have heard about but are a bit
fuzzy on. The confusion comes, it seems to us, from a popular but mistaken notion that the
grade of meat has something to do with whether or not it is safe to eat. It doesn’t.
        Meat is subjected to far more regulation and ofﬁcial evaluation than any other food
in this country. It is a very safe product. (If you want to know about a dangerously unregu­
lated industry, let’s talk seafood.) Since 1906, it has been mandatory that all meat be
inspected by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) at the packing plant to
be sure that it is produced under sanitary conditions and is not spoiled or contaminated. But
that doesn’t have anything to do with grading. All meat, whatever the grade, should be
equally safe for consumption.
        Grading is a voluntary program. If the producer wants to pay the USDA, a grader
will come to the plant and grade the meat. The reason the producer might do this is
because grade is an attempt to communicate to consumers the likely palatability of a par­
ticular piece of meat—its tenderness, juiciness, and ﬂavor.
        Meat grades are based on age (younger meat is more tender and therefore consid­
ered better) and the degree of intramuscular fat, or marbling (meat with more marbling is
juicier and more ﬂavorful and therefore considered better). There are eight possible grades
for beef, running from “Prime” at the top to “Canner” at the bottom. Veal and lamb have
fewer grades and pork has a different system altogether.
        But grading is actually much less important to your daily meat buying than you
might think. Only the top three grades—Prime, Choice, and Select—appear at meat coun­
ters or in butcher shops. The others are just not high enough quality for consumers to buy.
        And practically speaking, the grade of the meat is only an issue for most of us con­
sumers when it comes to beef. Veal, lamb, and pork all come from animals that are consid­
erably younger when slaughtered, which means that their meat is naturally more tender
and intramuscular fat is not so relevant a consideration. You may occasionally see these
meats with grades indicated in the market, but that is more the exception than the rule. So,
for more on grading, refer to page 41 in our Beef chapter.




                                                        A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   9
            PHYS ICAL APPEARANCE


             More important than grading when choosing an individual piece of meat are muscle
     color, texture, fat color, and amount of fat, all of which differ somewhat from animal to ani­
     mal. Pointers and tips about these qualities and exactly what to look for in each type of
     meat and in each particular cut are included in the individual chapter introductions as well
     as in the section labeled “The Cut” that accompanies each recipe.

            B RAN D I NG


             Sometimes you will come across what is known as “branded” meat. As with grad­
     ing, this is a factor that most often applies to beef. The brand in question can either be that
     of a speciﬁc producer or of a speciﬁc breed, such as Angus or Hereford in cattle. We believe
     that branding will probably become more common for all types of red meat in the coming
     years. The only way to ﬁnd out whether a meat bearing the brand name of a speciﬁc pro­
     ducer is consistently of higher quality than unbranded meat is to try the meat for yourself.
     The same is true of breed branding, although that does seem a more reliable guide, at least
     when it comes to beef.
             Before too long, we may well be seeing another more sophisticated type of brand­
     ing. The technology is at hand that will allow breeders to do an analysis of the genetic makeup
     of a piece of meat and to accurately predict the tenderness as well as the ﬂavor qualities of
     meat that comes from animals with that same genetic makeup. All meat from those animals
     can then be given a branded identity with a virtual money-back guarantee of the quality of
     the meat. We’re not sure how we feel about applying all this high technology to what
     should basically be a primal eating experience, but keep your eye out for it in any case.

            SU PE R MAR KET OR B UTCH E R?


             A more practical question is whether you should shop for meat at a butcher or at a
     supermarket. The choice really depends on several factors, including what particular cut of
     meat you’re looking for and how much you want to pay. Butcher shops tend to be a bit
     more expensive, but they’re also going to have the obscure cuts, and they will be happy to
     give you really thick versions of even the more commonly available selections. Besides that,
     the guy behind the counter is going to be very knowledgeable and therefore helpful if
     you’re a bit unsure of what you’re looking for.
             On the other hand, not everyone has a butcher store conveniently close to them, and
     there are many cuts of meat that you can easily get in perfectly good quality at the super­
     market.
             We’ve tried to help you with this choice throughout the book by pointing out those
     cuts of meat that you are likely to ﬁnd only in the butcher shop, so you will be aware of this
     in advance and won’t be disappointed at the supermarket. But we also encourage you to
     venture out there and ﬁgure out for yourself when to use each meat-buying option. In our



10   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
experience this is a good thing, not only because supermarket butchers and specialty butch­
ers serve different purposes but because butchers are generally pretty funny guys, and if
you go in and talk to them you’ll often ﬁnd the experience amusing as well as educational.
        To illustrate, let us tell you how we buy meat.
        I (Chris) generally buy my meat from John Dewar, a fantastic custom butcher who
services many of the ﬁnest hotels and restaurants in Boston, including the East Coast Grill,
but also has a retail business. So when I want a piece of meat, I’ll call up John and order a 2­
pound T-bone or a crown roast or a giant loin-end standing rib for Christmas dinner or a
steamship round of veal to impress my new in-laws. I know I’ll always get top quality and
exactly what I want, because John delivers the very best. In your town you probably have an
upscale butcher something like this, the guy you can call on the phone who will go out of
his way to help you ﬁnd what you want.
        On the other hand, I (Doc) count on John for special occasions, but for the most part
I get my meat from Larry, the butcher at the supermarket a few blocks from my house. Our
relationship has deﬁnitely changed over the past couple of years. The ﬁrst time I walked in
and asked for a skirt steak, for example, he looked me straight in the eye and said, “Buddy,
I’ve been working here for three years and I’ve never even seen a skirt steak.”
        Now, there were many possible replies to that, but none of them was going to get
me the steak I wanted. So I thought about it for a minute, then asked what he had in the
case that was really great. He grudgingly allowed as how they happened to have some fresh
leg of lamb from Vermont that for some reason no one was buying. I ﬁgured I could shift
gears and test a few lamb recipes, so I asked him if he could take one of the legs, cut about
four thick steaks from the center, a couple of chops from the sirloin end, and the rest into
cubes for shish kebab. He cocked his head, gave me a kind of quizzical look, and then said,
“Yeah, sure, that’s no problem.”
        At that moment, I think his idea of me changed from pain in the butt to someone
who might be interesting to work with, and I knew I was going to get some good lamb for
dinner. I’ve gone back there consistently over the past couple of years, and now when I walk
up to the counter—after Larry makes some crack about being fresh out of lamb’s brains—
we settle down to see what he can get me that will work for the dish I have in mind. I never
did get any skirt steak from Larry, but he did once put aside some fresh ham hocks that
came in because he ﬁgured I’d probably ﬁnd it interesting to cook with them. He was right.
        So our advice is to make the most of the supermarket meat counter. Challenge the
guy behind the counter and see if he will rise to the occasion. Ask him speciﬁcally for what
you want and see what happens. Some butchers may look at you as if you were crazy, but
others will be the happiest supermarket butchers in the world because they get to cut some­
thing special for someone who will actually appreciate it, rather than putting the same old
stuff into the same old plastic wrappers.
        Go ahead and ask for the two-inch-thick pork chop. Find out if, when you come in
next week, the butcher could have a ﬁve-pound boneless rib roast or a giant T-bone steak
for two, ready for you. You’ve got nothing to lose by asking, and there’s a fair chance that
you could end up with the equivalent of a butcher shop right in your own supermarket.



                                                         A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   11
            A LITTLE SCIENCE: GETTING THE BE ST
            FLAVOR FROM TODAY’S MEAT

              Wherever you get your meat, it is going to be considerably different from the meat
     our grandparents cooked. This is good in some ways and bad in others, but in any case, it
     has deﬁnite implications not only for the particular cut of meat you buy, but also for how
     you cook it.
              Over the past several decades, meat producers have responded to consumer health
     concerns by modifying breeding and feeding programs in order to produce leaner animals.
     The results of these efforts have been the most dramatic in pork, in which the fat content of
     some cuts (mostly from the loin) has been reduced by almost 60 percent in the past quarter
     century. But today’s beef and lamb are also leaner. (Veal has always been relatively lean for
     red meat.)
              This is deﬁnitely a positive development in terms of healthfulness. But in terms of
     sheer sensual enjoyment, it has been a mixed blessing, largely because of the various roles
     that fat plays in meat.
              There are two basic types of fat in meat: intermuscular fat, which is found between
     and around the muscles, and intramuscular fat, which is within the muscles themselves.
     Intermuscular fat can usually be trimmed off if you wish, with little effect. But intramuscu­
     lar fat, also known as marbling, plays several important roles in our enjoyment of meat.
              First, when the meat is cooked, the intramuscular fat melts and slips in between the
     muscle ﬁbers, lubricating them and making them tender. Second, this fat stimulates our
     salivary glands as we eat, which makes the meat seem juicy as we chew it. Finally, and prob­
     ably most important, intramuscular fat carries ﬂavor. Meat scientists even theorize that it is
     the fat that most distinguishes the ﬂavor of one type of red meat from another.
              In other words, the less intramuscular fat in a given piece of meat, the less ﬂavorful,
     tender, and juicy it will be. This is why in days past, when having too much fat in the diet was
     not considered a problem, cooks engaged in a practice called barding, in which they actually
     inserted long thin strips of pork fat into lean cuts of meat to improve its gustatory qualities.
              All of this does not mean that today’s meat is ﬂavorless or boring. But it does mean
     that the leaner cuts of meat—which also come from more tender parts of the animal, the
     loin and rib areas—tend to have less robust ﬂavor and somewhat less satisfying “mouth
     feel” than they did in the past.
              On the whole, this seems to be a reasonable trade-off for the health beneﬁts, partic­
     ularly since there are several ways to address this somewhat lower “ﬂavor quotient” in
     today’s meat. To begin with, it’s probably best not to cook lean cuts as long as our grand­
     mothers may have. Without fat to lubricate it, the meat dries out faster and also loses some
     of its ﬂavor. In the recipes in this book, we have adjusted the cooking times accordingly.
              Another way to address the issues raised by lower-fat meat is to look for other quali­
     ties that make meat ﬂavorful. Here are three good options.




12   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
       TH E FLAVOR /TE N D E R N E SS N EXUS

       Americans in general tend to equate tenderness with quality in meat, but that is not
the whole story. Don’t get us wrong—we appreciate a super-tender beef tenderloin or lamb
loin chop as much as the next person. But we would also like to encourage you to look at
meat from the standpoint of valuing the whole animal. If you do so, you’ll ﬁnd that most
cuts have some excellent qualities you can appreciate.
       In fact, we have found that there is a pretty strong inverse relationship between ﬂa­
vor and tenderness. In other words, the tougher the cut of meat, the more likely it is to have
deep, rich ﬂavor. There is a reason, for instance, that osso buco, made from the tough
shank, is among the very most popular veal dishes. And, in our experience, you’ll never get
more satisfying beef ﬂavor than from tough cuts like short ribs or oxtail.
       This ﬂavor/tenderness trade-off is familiar to chefs and food scientists alike, but the
reason behind it remains somewhat mysterious. In his seminal book On Food and Cooking,
for example, Harold McGee observes that exercise, which toughens the muscles of animals,
also contributes to their ﬂavor. He ascribes this phenomenon to some combination of the
nature of tissue cells and the concentration of fat, but he also admits to being somewhat
mystiﬁed.
       Taking advantage of this ﬂavor dynamic usually requires long, slow cooking with
moist heat to make the meat more tender. Sometimes, as with the lamb shoulder chops we
mentioned earlier, it also means accepting a bit of chewiness. That is a different quality
from stringiness or toughness, and it is one we actually enjoy in many cuts of meat.
       Some people recommend marinating tougher cuts as a means of making them
more tender, but we don’t agree. In our experience, marinating only makes the surface of
meat mushy and does little to tenderize the interior. We occasionally marinate for ﬂavor,
but don’t expect it to tenderize.


       B ETTE R ON TH E BON E

        Another ﬂavor-enhancer is to cook meat on the bone. Apart from the pure primal sat­
isfaction of the bone-in approach, we believe it actually makes the meat taste a little better.
        We spent a fair amount of time trying to ﬁgure out just why this might be, but with­
out much luck. We asked dozens of scientists, butchers, and just plain old meat eaters about
this. Almost to a person, they agreed with our assessment of this issue, but they had little in
the way of scientiﬁc explanation.
        Culinary experts and laboratory scientists at the National Cattleman’s Beef
Association suggested that it might have to do with the marrow in bones. Marrow has
highly concentrated ﬂavor, and they theorized that some of the marrow might seep from
the bones into the surrounding meat during cooking, intensifying its taste. This makes
sense to us, but when we tried this theory out on some of our butcher friends, they pointed
out that even thinner nonmarrow bones, such as those in a rib or a porterhouse steak,
sweeten the ﬂavor of meat.



                                                         A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   13
            Professor William Mikel of the University of Kentucky thought perhaps it might
     have to do with differing rates of heat transfer around the bone. In other words, since bone
     does not heat up as quickly as the meat itself, it may provide the juices with a place to con­
     centrate during the most intense heat of cooking. This squares with our own personal the­
     ory, which is that since the bone is surrounded with more capillaries than other parts of the
     meat, you end up with more juices, and therefore more ﬂavor, in the meat nearest the bone.
            Whatever the scientiﬁc explanation, it is far less important than the simple pleasure
     of eating meat on the bone. Try it and we bet you’ll agree.


            B ROWN I S GOOD

             There is one ﬁnal ﬂavor booster that is perhaps the most important of all. Whether
     you are eating meat bone-in or boneless, whether you choose tough cuts or tender ones, it
     is crucial to give the meat a good sear at the beginning of cooking.
             Despite what you may have heard, searing does not seal moisture inside the meat.
     What searing does do, though, is create an intense layer of deep ﬂavor on the outside of
     meat, which in turn adds an unbelievable amount of ﬂavor to the whole dish.
             This is one of the secrets of people who cook for a living. Hanging out with profes­
     sional cooks, two things you notice is that every time they approach a stove they’re not only
     going to make a huge mess (which they generally clean up, to be fair) but if there is meat
     involved in the meal, at some point you’re going to have to open the kitchen windows and
     turn off the smoke alarms. Unfortunately, we have found that many home cooks tend to
     shy away from browning meat really well, either from fear of overcooking the outside of
     the meat or from a dislike for the spattering that sometimes accompanies high-heat searing.
     Get over it. You really need to sear meat (except veal) until it has a good dark brown coat on
     all sides.
             The reason for this has to do with the ways that sugars and proteins act when they
     are heated together. The name for this phenomenon is the “Maillard reaction,” after the
     French doctor who ﬁrst analyzed it back in 1912. Busily investigating amino acids, Maillard
     stumbled across the fact that when carbohydrates and proteins are heated together, sugars
     (from the carbohydrate) and amino acids (from the proteins) combine to form new but
     unstable chemical structures. As the heat continues to be applied, these compounds in turn
     break down, producing literally hundreds of new by-products, each of which has a distinc­
     tive taste and aroma. As a result, food subjected to this process gains a whole new layer of
     rich, deep, complex ﬂavors.
             So start to think of a well-seared, slightly crusty, brown exterior as a forecast of deep
     ﬂavor rather than a reproach for overcooking. To aid in browning, always dry the meat well
     before you sear it. To cut down on spattering, use a pot with sides at least ﬁve inches high
     when browning meat for stews and braises; when using a sauté pan, you can always try
     using one of those mesh spatter shields. And if you become faint of heart, just repeat to
     yourself the ﬂavor mantra, “Brown is good, brown is good.” You’re going to have much
     better meat dishes if you do.



14   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
       WH E N I S IT DON E?

         Knowing when something is done to your liking is perhaps the single most impor­
tant aspect of being a good cook. Like every other food that is subjected to heat, meat will
be underdone, underdone, underdone, done, then overdone. In other words, the window
of perfect doneness is a small one, and you need to learn how to jump right through it
when it opens.
         The way to do this varies depending on the cut of meat you’re cooking. For roasts,
you need a thermometer; for braises, a fork is still the most reliable tool; for smaller pieces
of meat, we favor the classic “nick, peek, and cheat” method. The details of each of these
methods are explained in the individual sections in “Methods of Meat Cookery,” below.
         We realize, too, that the point at which something is “done” is not the same for all of
us. We believe that you should eat meat the way you like it, not the way you’re told to like
it. If you want your meat well-done, by all means cook it that way. After all, you’re the one
who paid for it.
         On the other hand, this is our book, so the recipe instructions are generally given for
cooking meat the way we like it. We prefer beef rare to medium-rare, but on the rare side;
veal medium-rare to medium, but on the medium side; pork medium; and lamb medium-
rare. So that’s what you’ll ﬁnd in our recipes. But we also give guidelines for those of you
who want to cook any of those meats more or less.
         It’s also true that one person’s rare may be another’s medium-rare. The table below
shows what we mean when we use these terms. The temperatures are the temperatures at
which the meat should be removed from the heat; the temperature will rise 5 to 7 degrees
as the meat rests—an important reason why you should be sure to give the meat a rest
before eating it.

                              T E M P E R AT U R E W H E N   FINAL APPEARANCE
                              R E M OV E D F R O M H E AT
                              SOURCE

       Rare                   120°F                          Raw center

       Medium-Rare            126°F                          Red center, slightly warm

       Medium                 134°F                          Pink center

       Medium-Well            150°F                          Hint of pink in center

       Well-Done              160°F                          Cooked throughout; no pink in center




                                                             A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   15
            PUTTING THE FIRE TO IT:
            METHODS OF MEAT COOKERY

             Determining when meat is done is the end of the cooking process. Selecting
     the right method for the particular cut of meat is the beginning. In between is another crit­
     ical part—applying the principles of the particular cooking method correctly.
             The sections below explain the hows and whys of each of these techniques. Most of
     the principles are at least as old as Escofﬁer, but we’ve tried to highlight what we have
     learned over the past couple of years about just how to apply each method to the cooking
     of meat. We’ve included a little science when we thought it would make the reasons behind
     the procedures clearer. In many ways, this is the heart of the book. Read it, and you’ll be a
     great meat cook in no time.


            ROASTI NG

             To us, there’s nothing more mouthwatering than a big, juicy, perfectly seared roast
     emerging from the oven. From medieval times, when a “joint” was the center of every ban­
     quet worth attending, right on down to the Sunday dinners and holiday feasts of our youth,
     roasts have always had a special standing as not only luxurious and celebratory, but com­
     pletely delicious. Not to mention that they often produce some very high-quality leftovers.
             Another reason for the enduring popularity of roasts is that they are very simple:
     Just put that meat in the oven and go about your other business as it cooks.
             Despite this simplicity, though, the ability to roast well has long been considered a
     crucial test of a cook’s skill. Brillat-Savarin, the famous and very inﬂuential nineteenth-cen­
     tury French gourmand, even went so far as to say that roasting was an innate skill that
     determined whether you would be a good cook or not; if you were unlucky enough not to
     be born a roaster, there was no way you could be taught. Even though at that time “roast­
     ing” meant turning meat on a spit over an open ﬁre, we still think that Brillat-Savarin was
     off-base. Instead, we go along with that other celebrated Frenchman of the nineteenth cen­
     tury, Auguste Escofﬁer, the chef who basically codiﬁed Western culinary techniques. “One
     may become a good roaster,” he said, “with application, observation, care, and a little apti­
     tude.”
             Actually, we don’t even think you need much aptitude if you just pay some attention
     to what you’re doing.
             The ﬁrst step is picking the right cut of meat, which is very simple. As a dry-heat
     cooking method, roasting is suitable only for relatively tender cuts. Because it is a rather
     slow cooking process, it is also best for large cuts of meat, those that take a while to cook all
     the way through.
             With the meat chosen, you are ready to roast. Our approach, which we think will
     give you excellent results, may be a little different from the style that you’re used to. It may
     seem a bit mysterious. But it is actually quite simple. The three key points are: Sear the
     meat at a high oven temperature, ﬁnish roasting at a low to moderate temperature, and
     estimate the cooking time not by weight, but by mass.


16   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
        Let’s take the last point ﬁrst. One culinary myth that has resulted in many an unsat­
isfactory meal is the idea that you should cook a roast for “X” minutes per pound. Please
forget that. It just doesn’t make sense. What matters in determining roasting time is not so
much the weight of the roast, but its size and shape. This is particularly true of roasts from
the loin and the rib, which tend to be oblong in shape. For roasts from the round and chuck,
which are usually rolled and tied, there is a closer (although far from exact) correlation
between weight and cooking time.
        Here’s an example. Say you have one tenderloin that is six inches long and about two
inches in diameter, and another that is a foot long and also about two inches in diameter.
The second one weighs about twice as much as the ﬁrst, but do you really think it will take
twice as long to cook? No way. It will actually take almost exactly the same amount of time,
because it is about the same thickness. If, on the other hand, you took two tenderloins,
stacked them on top of each other, and tied them together, it would indeed take about twice
as long to roast as a single tenderloin, because the combined pieces of meat would be twice
as thick. It is the mass and shape, not the weight, that is the best indicator of cooking time.
        So from now on when you look at a roast in the market, don’t think of it as so many
pounds; instead, think of how it relates in size and shape to a familiar object like a milk car­
ton. That will be a much better rough guide to how long it will take to cook. Of course, its
exact cooking time will vary depending on the degree of doneness you are looking for, but
this will provide you with a general idea. More importantly, it will start you thinking about
mass rather than weight when cooking roasts. So here are approximate cooking times,
geared toward having the meat medium-rare, for roasts that look like they are about the
size of these containers, assuming that you use our approach of searing hard and then
cooking low:

       C O N TA I N E R S I Z E                    A P P R OX I M AT E C O O K I N G T I M E

       1 quart                                     30 to 40 minutes
       1⁄ 2   gallon                               45 minutes to 1 hour

       Gallon jug                                  2 to 21 ⁄ 2 hours




                                  Milk carton art will go here




                                                           A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   17
             As for the high-then-low oven temperature, we use this approach for two reasons:
     It’s simple and it works really well. An initial high heat searing is essential to a good roast.
     Some people like to sear their roasts on top of the stove, but we think that cooks are more
     likely to sear long enough to get a nice dark crust if they can simply put the meat in the
     oven and let it brown.
             But if you then continue to roast a large piece of meat at a high oven temperature, it
     will tend to lose too much fat and moisture and get dry. Roasting at a low to moderate oven
     temperature, about 300°F, keeps the meat tender and juicy. This is particularly important
     for larger roasts.
             Another important step in roasting actually comes after the meat is out of the oven:
     Let it rest for a while before you carve and serve it. This may go against your feeling that
     food should be served hot right out of the oven, but here patience is deﬁnitely a virtue.
     Good cooks have long known that allowing cooked meat to rest is important, but in recent
     years, food scientists like our friend Harold McGee have provided scientiﬁc backup for the
     ﬁrsthand observations of experienced cooks. Here’s the low-down.
             As the proteins in meat heat up during cooking, they coagulate, which basically
     means that they uncoil and bond with each other. As this happens, the proteins squeeze out
     some of the liquid that was held in their coiled structures and in the spaces between the
     individual molecules. The external heat from the cooking source then drives the freed liq­
     uid toward the center of the meat. (It is this process that allows professional cooks to judge
     the degree of doneness of a piece of meat just by pressing on it with a ﬁnger; the more the
     proteins have coagulated, the ﬁrmer and, therefore, the more done the meat is.) But this
     coagulation process is at least partially reversible. As the meat rests and cools somewhat
     after coming out of the oven, the ability of the protein molecules to hold moisture
     increases, and some of the liquid is redistributed and reabsorbed by those molecules. As a
     result, less juice will run out when you cut the roast. This, in turn, makes for juicier and
     more tender meat on the plate.
             So be patient and let that roast have a rest. You will often need the time anyway, to
     make a simple sauce from the pan drippings. And on those occasions when everything else
     is actually ready for dinner, use the time to have another beverage of your choice with your
     guests.

     Roasting Techniques
     The essential ﬁrst step in roasting meat is to preheat the oven to a high temperature (we like
     500°F). While the oven is preheating, you can pat the roast dry and season it generously with
     salt and pepper. Now put it in the hot oven and sear it really well. Browning a roast in the
     oven generally takes about 20 minutes, but, as always, you should use visual clues rather than
     set times to determine when the cooking task has been accomplished. In this case, the clue is
     simple: You want the roast to be dark brown on the outside. If you look in the oven after 10
     minutes and ﬁnd that the roast is getting too brown, turn the temperature down a bit; if you
     check the roast after 20 minutes and it is not dark enough, keep on searing until it is.
            Once the meat is well browned, turn the oven down to 300°F. At this point, add any



18   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
vegetables that you want to roast alongside the meat but that you did not want to subject to
the initial high heat. Then just let that meat cook.
         About 15 minutes before you think the roast will actually be done, start checking its
state of doneness with a meat thermometer. This is the best way to ﬁgure out if your roast
is done, and it’s important to do it right and get an accurate reading. To make sure you’re at
dead center of the roast, poke the thermometer all the way through to the other side, then
draw it back to the midpoint. Wait for 5 seconds (count it out), and you should get an accu­
rate read. When cooking bone-in roasts, be sure you’re not touching the bone, which
would give you a screwy reading.
         When the roast is done to your liking—and that’s easy to know: 120°F is rare, 126°F
is medium-rare, 134°F is medium, and 160°F is well-done—take it out of the oven, cover it
loosely with foil to keep it warm, and let it rest for 10 to 20 minutes.
         When you take the roast out of the pan, you’ll usually see some very dark brown
bits stuck to the bottom of the pan. Because of the browning reactions that have taken
place during the initial searing and long roasting, these bits are very ﬂavorful. Often, though
not always, you will want to take advantage of that. To do so, simply spoon off the fat from
the pan, put the pan on the stove over medium-high heat, add some ﬂavorful liquid like
stock or wine, and bring the liquid to a simmer, scraping the bottom of the pan to incorpo­
rate the browned bits. Many classical recipes call for thickening the liquid with ﬂour or but­
ter at this point, but we usually prefer to just let it simmer until the liquid is reduced and the
ﬂavor is concentrated—then, skim off the ﬁlm, strain out the solids, and you’ve got your jus.
         You’re done. Slice the meat into thick slices if it’s a very tender cut such as prime rib
or tenderloin, thinner slices for tougher roasts such as chuck roast. Now pour some of the
jus (if you’ve made it) over it, and serve it up with the rest of the jus on the side. That’s real
eating.


       B RAI S I NG

       Although braising may sound foreign to some of you, it really isn’t. What we’re talk­
ing about here is a lot of variations on the theme of pot roast: Basically, braising is cooking
food in a relatively small amount of liquid in a closed container over a relatively long period
of time. Like barbecuing, braising is a “slow and low” method.
       Next to grilling, braising may be our favorite cooking method for meat. This is
because the primary goal of braising meat is to transform tough into tender, a process that
creates a very tasty meal indeed.
       The cuts of meat most suitable for braising come from the parts of the animal’s
body—primarily the shoulder and parts of the leg—used in moving around. This means
they contain a lot of the connective tissue called collagen. To make such cuts tender, it is
necessary to melt the collagen, transforming it into gelatin. Braising is particularly effective
at doing this because the meat cooks at a relatively low temperature for a long time. If the
meat were cooked at a higher temperature, the collagen would be steamed away; if it were
cooked for a shorter period of time, the collagen would not melt.



                                                           A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   19
             Meats for braising also need to have a relatively high proportion of intramuscular
     fat. This is important, because the fat keeps the meat moist during the long, slow cooking
     process.
             When braising, there are really only three fundamental rules to follow, all related to
     the fact that braising is a variant of boiling.
             First, because boiling water never gets above 212°F degrees and browning does not
     begin to take place below 325°F degrees, braising food will not brown it. Therefore, it is
     very important that you start out by putting a good strong sear on whatever you are going
     to braise. This creates a concentrated layer of ﬂavor that will later be diffused throughout
     the broth, ﬂavoring the entire dish. Similarly, be sure to dissolve the brown bits that are left
     on the bottom of the pan after searing, again because their intense ﬂavors will permeate the
     broth during the long cooking.
             Second, since water stays at the same temperature as long as it continues to boil, no
     talent or effort is required on the part of the cook to keep food that is being braised at a con­
     stant, even temperature for a long period of time with no threat that the exterior will burn.
     This is fortunate, because the single most important aspect of braising is to cook the food
     long enough to reach tenderness, a point that is appraised not by internal temperature but
     by texture.
             Finally, snugness is important in two ways when braising. The meat should ﬁt snugly
     into the pan, so that a small amount of liquid will come about halfway up the sides of the
     meat, and the lid should ﬁt snugly on the pan so the upper part of the meat is cooking in
     steam.
             Like stews, braises are even better if made a day ahead of time. This has two advan­
     tages. First, since braising is a long, slow process, it’s hard to have braised dishes on week­
     nights—unless you cook them one night and eat them the next. Second, most cuts of meat
     that are suitable for braising contain quite a lot of fat. If you refrigerate the dish overnight,
     you can then simply remove the layer of fat that will form on top of the liquid and discard
     it before reheating the dish.

     Braising Techniques
     First you want to dry the meat well, season it well, and—using a pot that will hold the meat
     snugly—brown it very well. For the large pieces of meat that are typical of braises, we ﬁnd
     that searing takes about 15 minutes, which is probably longer than you might think. But
     don’t hesitate—it will be worth it. When the meat is nicely browned, take it out of the pot.
             Next, you want to brown any aromatic vegetables (onions, garlic, carrots, celery,
     etc.) that you are using. To do this, you’ll typically need only a couple of tablespoons of fat
     in the pot. So if the meat you have just browned was fatty, you’ll need to pour out some of
     the excess fat; if, on the other hand, the meat was lean, you may need to add a bit of oil to
     the pot. Then go ahead and brown the vegetables.
             At this point, you will probably notice a bunch of browned bits stuck to the bottom
     of the pot. In French cooking, this stuff is called fond, and it is deﬁnitely not something you
     want to clean out of the pot. It is intensely ﬂavorful due to the browning reactions that have



20   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
taken place during searing. What you want to do is loosen and dissolve those brown bits in
liquid so their ﬂavor will be diffused throughout the dish as it cooks. This is called “deglaz­
ing.” So you add the liquid to the pot and, as you heat it to a simmer, use a wooden spoon
to scrape up all those browned bits.
        Now you’re ready to return the meat to the pot, along with any other vegetables you
want to add. Just nestle the meat right in there, then check to see that it is covered about
halfway by the liquid. If the amount of liquid called for in the recipe is too much or too lit­
tle, make the adjustment by using less or more. After all, few pieces of meat are exactly the
same size, so the amount of liquid we call for is only an approximation.
        When the liquid has come back to a simmer, skim any ﬁlm off the surface, cover the
pot, and put it in a 300°F oven. You could cook the meat on top of the stove, but we prefer
using the oven because it provides a more even heat that surrounds the pot, rather than
coming only from the bottom.
        Now you’re basically done. Just let the meat cook and, about 15 minutes before the
point at which we suggest it may be done, start checking it. The best way to determine
doneness with braised meat is to stick a large fork straight down into the meat and try to lift
it out of the pan. If you can’t do so because the meat won’t hold the fork, then it has
reached the state our grandmothers called “fork-tender,” and it’s ready to eat. Remember,
you are cooking past the point of doneness to the point of tenderness.
        When the meat is done, you’ll also want to check the braising liquid. Often it will
have all the ﬂavor you want, and you’ll be ready to serve the dish. Sometimes, though, you
may feel that it should have a more intense ﬂavor. No problem. Simply take the meat out of
the pot, set it on a platter, and cover it loosely with foil. Now put the cooking pot on the
stove over medium-high heat, bring the braising liquid to a boil, and reduce it until it is ﬂa­
vorful enough for your taste. Either way, you will want to do a ﬁnal seasoning of the brais­
ing liquid with salt and pepper.
        Now, carve the meat into thick slices, pour the braising liquid into a big gravy boat,
and you’re ready to eat some incredibly ﬂavorful, really tender meat.


       G R I LLI NG, SAUTÉI NG, AN D B ROI LI NG

        It will come as no surprise to any of you who have read our other books that grilling
is our absolute favorite cooking method. There’s nothing like the thrill of cooking over live
ﬁre, and nothing like the taste of food that is cooked this way. A juicy, perfectly seared piece
of ﬁre-cooked meat coming off the grill is about as close to culinary perfection as we can
imagine.
        We’re not going to go into a lot of detail about grilling here, because there simply
isn’t room to deal with all the many manifestations of this most exciting of cooking meth­
ods. (If you’re interested, you might want to check out our previous book License to Grill.)
But we are going to give what we consider to be the most helpful general guidelines, which
apply not only to grilling but also to sautéing and broiling.
        We’re combining these three cooking methods here because the principles of all



                                                         A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   21
     three are the same. They are all dry-heat cooking techniques in which meat (in this case) is
     cooked quickly over direct, intense heat. This means that they are all best suited to cooking
     relatively small, very tender cuts of meat: small because the high heat would cause a large
     piece of meat to burn on the outside well before it was cooked on the inside, tender
     because the quickness of the process does not allow time for any connective tissues to break
     down during cooking.
              Whichever of these high-heat cooking methods you use, it is usually best to buy
     thick. That way, you can sear the meat nicely on the outside without overcooking it on the
     inside. You’ll notice that we almost always call for steaks, chops, and other tender cuts of
     meat that are at least 11⁄ 2 inches thick and sometimes as much as 2 inches or even more. We
     understand that there are variations in the thicknesses of these cuts and that you may not
     be able to ﬁnd, for example, a 2-inch-thick porterhouse steak. We are giving you the ideal.
     But if you can’t ﬁnd it, just buy the thickest you can get a hold of and adjust the cooking
     time accordingly.
              Since searing is the essence of all three cooking methods, the ﬁrst step for all of
     these techniques is to make sure the heat is high before you start cooking the meat.
              For grilling, that means building a ﬁre about half an hour before you start cooking
     so the ﬂames can die down and the coals can become covered with gray ash. At that point,
     you need to check the temperature of the ﬁre to be sure it is just right; most meats should
     start out over a hot ﬁre, but some need medium-high. We also recommend that you usually
     build a two-level ﬁre, with one side of the grill hot and the other side cooler. That way, if
     the meat starts to burn on the outside before it is cooked through, you can move it to the
     cooler side.
              For sautéing, be sure that you use only a little bit of oil, really just enough to ﬁlm the
     surface of the pan—you want the meat to sear, not fry. Heat the oil over medium-high heat
     until it is very hot, almost smoking, before you add the meat.
              For broiling, be sure that you preheat the broiler before you start cooking.
              Another key to these cooking methods is to ﬂip the meat only once while it is cooking.
     If you keep ﬂipping it back and forth, not only do you interfere with the proper formation of
     the sear, you also disrupt the process of driving the juices to the center of the meat. Don’t
     think, either, that you have to cook meat for an equal amount of time on both sides. You can
     cook it for 70 percent of the time on one side and 30 percent on the other side and it will come
     out just ﬁne. The point at which you should ﬂip is not necessarily the midpoint of the cooking
     process, but the point at which the ﬁrst side achieves the sear you want it to have.
              As with other cooking methods, a primary aspect of perfect grilling, sautéing, and
     broiling is knowing when the meat is done to your liking. Some people recommend using a
     thermometer to check doneness for meats cooked with these methods, but we prefer more
     direct methods.
              One option is the “hand method,” which many professional chefs use. This means
     that you poke the meat and compare it to the feeling of various parts of your hand: You
     start with rare, which feels like the connective tissue between the ball of your thumb and
     the knuckle of your index ﬁnger, and progress to very well done, which feels like the base of



22   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
the ball of your thumb. It’s fun to use this method, and we recommend you poke meat
when you’re cooking it so that you begin to learn about this method from personal experi­
ence. But it’s very hard to do when you’re cooking just one dish. It makes much more sense
for professionals, who can compare dozens or even hundreds of similar cuts of meat in a
single evening.
        Let us explain by example. When I (Chris) was working at the Diplomat Hotel in
Florida in 1976, on one Saturday night in February, I was assigned the “steak station.” That
evening I cooked nothing but sirloins, and I sent out 373 steaks, not one of which was
returned for being incorrectly done. This feat is still legend in southern Florida and,
although I was only a twenty-two-year-old culinary student at the time, it remains one of
my personal career highlights. On the other hand, I’m not allowed to cook steaks at my sis­
ter’s house, because I always overcook them. So as you can see, it’s easy to use the hand
method when you’re cooking one steak after another after another, but when you’re cook­
ing only one or two you tend to misjudge.
        So we recommend that you learn the touch method as you go along, but for every­
day use, we suggest what we call the “nick, peek, and cheat” method. As the name implies,
you simply pick up one of whatever you are cooking, nick it slightly with a knife so you can
look inside, and check its state of doneness. That’s all there is to it. No guesswork, no intri­
cate techniques. It couldn’t get much easier—or more accurate.
        Despite that, though, many home cooks shy away from this method. One reason is
that somehow the idea has taken hold that it is not good to handle food while it is being
cooked. Not true. Check out any professional cook, and you will notice that he or she is con­
stantly touching what they are cooking. Another reason people avoid the “peek and cheat”
method is the myth that cutting into a piece of food lets all the juices run out. Again, not true.
Some juices do escape, but it’s not like putting a hole in a balloon; the very small amount of
juice you may lose pales in comparison to the prospect of serving raw or burned food.
        With the tender cuts of meat that are cooked with any of these three methods,
doneness is a matter of taste, with opinions running the gamut from dead raw to gray
throughout. This makes it easy: Simply look inside to see if the meat is done to your liking.
Remember, though, that the meat will continue to cook a bit after it is removed from the
heat, a phenomenon known as “carryover cooking.” So, if you want your meat medium-
rare, for example, remove it when it still looks rare.

Grilling/Sautéing/Broiling Techniques
Begin by making sure that your ﬁre is hot, the oil in your sauté pan is almost smoking, or
your broiler is fully preheated.
       While the heat source is heating up, dry the meat well and season it generously with
salt and pepper. Then place it on the grill, add it to the pan, or put it in the broiler, making
sure in all cases that you do not crowd the pieces of meat. If you do, the meat will not sear
well.
       When the meat is well seared on the ﬁrst side (however long that may take), turn it
to cook the other side. Don’t keep ﬂipping it back and forth.



                                                           A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   23
             If at some point you decide that the meat is cooking so fast that it will burn on the
     outside before cooking through, move it to the cool side of the grill, turn down the heat
     under the sauté pan, or turn the broiler to low if you have that option. When grilling,
     though, resist the temptation to use the cover when cooking small cuts of meat. Since they
     are only on the grill a short time, they will pick up an unpleasant ﬂavor from the inside of
     the cover. If you feel you need to cover the meat so it cooks through more thoroughly, use
     a metal pie plate or disposable aluminum pan.
             That’s about all there is to it—another reason we are so fond of grilling and its
     cousin cooking methods. As with all other cooking methods, check for doneness early and
     often, using the “nick, peek, and cheat” method. When the meat is done one level less than
     you want it to be when you eat it, remove it from the heat and let it rest for 5 minutes. Then
     serve it and eat it. It doesn’t get much better than that.


            STEWI NG

             Nothing is quite so homey and comforting as a meat stew. Precisely because the
     cooking method is so imprecise—you put some pieces of meat and a bunch of other ingre­
     dients in a pot, cover them with liquid, and cook until they’re done—stews have a reassur­
     ing aura of hearty, down-home simplicity. Since the ﬂavor of the meat permeates the entire
     dish as it slowly simmers, stews also have a long and honorable history of making a little bit
     of meat go a long way.
             The principles of stewing are very much like those of braising: The long, slow
     moist-heat cooking transforms much of the connective tissue in tough pieces of meat into
     gelatin, making the meat far more tender. The primary difference between the two cooking
     methods is that stewing uses smaller pieces of meat and a larger amount of liquid, enough
     to completely cover the meat and other ingredients. In other words, if braising is wading,
     then stewing is swimming.
             When it comes to choosing meat for stews, you usually have two options. You can
     either buy prepackaged “stew meat” or buy a larger piece of meat and cube it yourself. The
     obvious advantage of the ﬁrst option is convenience, and we are certainly in favor of that.
     But there is also a deﬁnite advantage to cutting up the meat yourself.
             Certain cuts of meat, mostly from the shoulder, and from the leg in some animals,
     are ideal for stewing. They have plenty of connective tissue to provide ﬂavor, along with
     enough fat to keep the meat moist during the long, slow cooking. Chances are that when
     you buy prepackaged meat some of it comes from these cuts, but, since most prepackaged
     stew meat consists of trimmings left over from any relatively gnarly cut after the butcher
     has fashioned the larger cuts from it, you will probably be getting a mixture of bits from
     several parts of the animal. So to be sure that you are getting the best meat for stews, buy
     that larger piece and cut it up yourself. This also allows you to cut it into relatively large
     cubes, which gives the meat a more signiﬁcant presence in the stew. To us, that makes for a
     more satisfying eating experience.




24   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Stewing Techniques
As with all other methods of cooking meat, stewing starts out with drying the meat, then
seasoning it liberally and browning it well. Drying is particularly important here. Moisture
on the surface of meat would cause the hot oil to splatter, and when using small pieces of
meat, there is more opportunity for the oil to splatter up between them rather than just
around the edges as with a larger piece.
       It is also important that you do not crowd the meat in the pot when browning. If
you do, the meat will not get hot enough and it will begin to exude too much liquid to
brown well. So be sure that the cubes of meat do not touch each other, even if this means
that you need to brown the meat in batches rather than all at once.
       You also want to check to be sure the oil is hot enough before you begin browning
the stew meat. To do this, put a single piece of meat in the pot when you think the oil is hot
enough. If it does not sizzle the moment it hits the pot take it out and wait for the oil to
heat up more. On the other hand, if it spits, sputters, and smokes, the oil is too hot; remove
the pot from the heat and let it cool slightly.
       After browning the meat, you’ll want to adjust the amount of fat in the pot, then
brown the aromatic vegetables and deglaze the pot, just as you do when braising. Then put
the meat back into the pot and add enough liquid to just cover all the ingredients. If the
amount of liquid speciﬁed in the recipe is not enough, simply add more of the appropriate
stock, wine or beer, or water.
       After skimming any ﬁlm off the top of the liquid, reduce the heat to low and simmer
slowly until the meat is done. As with other cooking methods, the times that we give in the
recipes are only approximations, and the only way to be sure when any particular stew is
done to your liking is to check early and often. With stews, the method of doing this is
supremely straightforward: Take out a piece of meat and taste it. It should be tender rather
than chewy.
       When the meat is done, the stew is almost ready. Because we like the dynamic of
adding something fresh and bright to long-cooked stews, we often toss in a bit of citrus
juice or fresh herbs or something of that nature right at the end. After that, it’s just a matter
of adjusting the seasoning with salt and pepper, skimming any ﬁlm from the surface, and
serving it up.
       Thick or thin, many stews are excellent served just as is. But some are even better
when served over a starch such as rice or with potatoes. We’ll give you advice in this depart­
ment in each stew recipe, but feel free to improvise as you please. After all, it’s your stew.


       TOP 5 TI PS FOR COOKI NG M EAT

       We’ve given you a lot of information in the preceding pages, and we hope that it has
been useful. But for ourselves, we ﬁnd it also helps to have the most important basics in
condensed form. So here are our fundamental, highly important tips for cooking meat. If
you follow them, you are going to end up with some pretty ﬁne meat on your plate.




                                                          A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   25
            1. Use the right method for the right meat.
          We’ve said it before and now we’ll say it again: It is crucial that you match the
     method to the meat: cook tender cuts with dry heat, tougher cuts with moist heat.
            2. Use plenty of kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper.
             When we say “sprinkle generously,” we mean it. Nothing brings out meat’s rich ﬂa­
     vors like salt, and as for fresh pepper, we think it is one of the few ingredients for which
     there is no substitute. It is a whole different animal from preground, and well worth the
     small amount of extra effort.
            3. Sear the meat longer than you think you should.
           Look for a dark brown sear on the outside of the meat, not just a light golden hue.
     And for best results, always dry the meat well before searing it.
            4. Check for doneness early and often.
            There are plenty of variables in cooking, from the particular piece of meat you buy
     to the pot you use to the stove you cook on. That means that the times given in recipes are
     only guidelines. Start checking for doneness well before the recommended cooking time is
     up, and check frequently after that.
            5. Get to know your butcher.
            Since buying good-quality meat is the ﬁrst step to a good meal, this may be the most
     important tip of all. As with ﬁshmongers or farmers or cheese sellers, having a personal
     relationship with a butcher is an invaluable help.


            COOK’S NOTE S


            START WITH SALT

            Forget about that old rule that you don’t salt meat just prior to cooking because it
     draws out moisture. The small amount of ﬂuid drawn to the surface by salt is more than
     compensated for by the fact that the salt has a chance to interact with the meat and amplify
     its ﬂavors. Because the moisture drawn to the surface contains proteins, early salting also
     intensiﬁes the browning process. We prefer kosher salt for a number of reasons, primarily
     because it seems to have a deeper ﬂavor than regular salt and its large crystals make it easier
     to judge just how much salt you’re adding when you use your ﬁngers—which is the best
     and most fun way to do it. (By the way, when making any of our recipes that call for a set
     amount of salt, as opposed to “to taste,” be aware that regular table salt has about twice as
     much salt per volume as kosher salt.)


            AG I NG, NO

            Aged meat is not the same as old meat. Aging is a process by which meat (almost
     always beef ) is allowed to sit over a number of days exposed to the air in conditions of care-


26   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
fully controlled temperature, humidity, and air circulation. As moisture evaporates and cer­
tain enzymes go to work on the meat’s protein, the meat becomes more tender and gains a
deeper, more concentrated ﬂavor.
        It is theoretically possible to age meat at home in your refrigerator, but it’s not such
a great idea. Too many things can go wrong along the way, and you are likely to end up
with meat that is spoiled rather than properly aged. In our opinion, the eating of aged beef
is an experience best reserved for restaurant dining. Since this is a book about home cook­
ing, that’s really all we have to say about it.


       FR E E Z I NG, YE S

        Freezing meat, on the other hand, is a ﬁne idea for the home cook. Meat freezes
well—some types better than others—and doing so lets you take advantage of good prices
when you see them. It also lets you hang on to meat that you buy and then can’t use as
quickly as you thought you would. Of course, no meat that has been frozen and then
thawed will ever be exactly the same quality as the fresh version, but if you take a few pre­
cautions along the way, it can be pretty close.
        The two key points here are to take the meat from fresh to frozen as quickly as pos­
sible and to keep air from getting to the meat while it is in the freezer. To accomplish the
ﬁrst goal, set your freezer on the lowest (coldest) setting. While the optimal temperature
for freezing meat is 0°F, many home freezers operate closer to 10° to 15°F; the lower you
can set yours, the better. For the second goal, wrap the meat in a double layer of either
freezer paper or plastic wrap, not aluminum foil, which tends to become brittle and crack
when frozen. Try to wrap the meat as tightly as you can, so that as little air remains inside
the package as possible. It’s also a good idea to get some freezer tape if you’re going to be
freezing a lot of meat. Unlike regular tape, it will stay on the package even at freezing tem­
peratures, and it is specially made for writing on, so you can label and date the packages.
        Even if you don’t buy special freezer tape, do label and date packages of meat before
you put them into the freezer. A label is important because it keeps you from being faced
with a mystery package when your memory fails you a few weeks or months later. A date is
important because oxidation and dehydration of meat continue very slowly even at freez­
ing temperatures, so you don’t want to leave the meat in the freezer forever. The optimal
approach is to use meat within a month or two of the time you put it in the freezer, simply
because you are not going to be able to wrap it tightly enough to get all of the air out. It’s
acceptable, though, to keep pork frozen for up to 6 months, veal and lamb for 9 months,
and beef up to a year.
        To thaw meat, take it out of the freezer, put it on a plate, and let it thaw overnight in
the refrigerator. Thawing it at room temperature is too inviting to bacteria, and thawing in
the microwave gives you mushy meat. Many books advise that twenty-four hours is sufﬁ­
cient to thaw meat, but we have found that this is true only of smaller cuts; roasts may take
considerably longer. Since there is nothing more annoying than going to prepare the roast
and ﬁnding it still frozen at the center, we recommend giving large roasts a couple of days
to thaw.


                                                          A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   27
            M EAT SAFETY

     Doneness
     You’ll notice that in the case of tender cuts of meat such as roasts, steaks, and chops, we
     don’t follow the USDA guidelines in terms of how long the meat should be cooked. There
     is a simple reason for this: In our opinion, the guidelines instruct you to cook meat until it is
     overdone. Follow them, and the meat will be dry and relatively ﬂavorless. There is no good
     restaurant in the country that follows the USDA guidelines, and neither do we.
              The exception to this rule is ground meat. With larger cuts, there is no way for air­
     borne bacteria or germs to get inside the meat. Any that are on the outer surface will be
     killed by the high heat of searing, and much lower cooking temperatures are high enough
     to kill the food-borne pathogens that might be inside the meat. With ground meat, on the
     other hand, every bit of the meat has been exposed to possible contamination by airborne
     pathogens. That means you really do have to be concerned about cooking the meat well
     enough to kill all those nasty bugs.


            STORAG E

             You want to watch out for keeping meat, either fresh or cooked, in the refrigerator
     for too long. All fresh meat should be wrapped quite tightly before being refrigerated, but
     different meats keep for different lengths of time. As a rule of thumb, veal should only be
     kept refrigerated for a day or two, while pork can be kept there for 2 to 3 days, and beef and
     lamb can go for 3 to 4 days. For the most part, organ meats, which are quite perishable,
     should be refrigerated for only a day or so. After that, it’s cook it or freeze it.
             Once cooked, meat will last for 4 or 5 days in the refrigerator if well covered.


            PORTION S I Z E

            Our recipes call for traditional portions of meat, but you can easily adjust this to suit
     your own diet. We may say, for example, that a 3-pound pork loin roast serves 4 to 6; but if
     you are eating less meat these days, you can serve it to 8 or even 10 guests. If you want a
     pork roast but you’re not having that many people over for dinner, don’t worry—we pro­
     vide ideas for using the leftovers too.




            THE TOOLS YOU NEED


             You don’t need many tools to cook meat, and you probably already have most
     or all of them. So, assuming that you already have the standard big items (a stove, a grill)
     and small items (wooden spoons, a ladle, sharp knives), here are the other tools and pans
     you should have on hand to make the recipes in this book.


28   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
TON G S : The single most used tools in both of our kitchens are our long-han­
dled, spring-loaded tongs. They are ideal for ﬂipping small items in the sauté
pan, moving things around on the grill, plucking cubes of meat out of stews to
test their doneness, and even for turning small roasts. We recommend that you
have several pairs on hand.
M E AT TH E R M O M E TE R:When you’re dealing with a large roast there is no
good way to accurately judge its state of doneness except with a meat ther­
mometer. This is one place where it is worth spending some money and get­
ting a good one. We generally prefer the dial thermometers to the digital
instant-read variety because, in our experience, they tend to be longer-lasting
and more reliable. Admittedly they may not be as easy to read with absolute
precision, but then a difference of half a degree in meat temperature is not a
big deal anyway.
        That said, there is one style of digital-style thermometer that you might
want to check out if you cook a lot of roasts. Usually referred to as a “ther­
mometer/timer,” it consists of a thermometer/timer unit that is connected to
a probe by a long wire. To use it, you push the probe into the roast, put
the roast in the oven, and set the thermometer/timer unit, which sits on the
counter, to the internal temperature you want the roast to cook to. When the
roast reaches that temperature, the timer buzzes. The down side of this is that,
since you are not opening the oven door to check the temperature, you do not
see the meat at all, which can be a slight problem because there are factors
other than temperature (e.g., color) that you might want to assess. On the
other hand, it is deﬁnitely convenient.
R OASTI N G PAN S: It’s a good idea to have a couple of roasting pans, one large
and one medium-sized. You will need the larger one for things like leg of lamb,
but if you put a smaller roast into a pan that is way too big for it, the juices will
probably burn in the large empty areas around the meat. Get roasting pans
that are heavy enough so they can be used on top of the stove as well as in the
oven. That way you can make the jus right in the roasting pan rather than a
saucepan, which increases your dishwashing tasks.
R OASTI N G RACK: If you put a roast on a rack rather than just on the bottom of
the pan, it cooks a lot more evenly, because the hot air can circulate all around
it. Also, it won’t burn on the bottom. It’s best to get a sturdy rack.
                                                  A Dutch oven is nothing but
D UTCH OVE N O R OTH E R H E AV Y-B OTTO M E D P OT:
a wide deep pot with a lid and handles. The important part of this pot—what
makes it different, for example, from a stockpot—is that it always has a heavy
bottom. That means you can use it to brown meat on the stove over high heat,
then add liquid and braise or stew the meat along with other ingredients. Since
browning the meat well is crucial to the ﬂavor of stews and braises, a pot of
this type is pretty close to essential.


                                                           A L L T H E M E AT T H AT ’ S F I T T O E AT   29
                      SAUTÉ PAN S: You will need a large sauté pan, and you should probably
                      have a small one too. Be sure that they are ovenproof so that you can
                      brown meat on the stove and then put it in the oven in the same pan.
                      Again, this will cut down on the amount of dishwashing you have to do—
                      and that’s about the only part of cooking that is no fun. We particularly
                      like those big black cast-iron sauté pans and skillets. They’re heavy, but
                      they conduct heat remarkably efﬁciently and evenly and they are inde­
                      structible.
                      STOCK P OT: You’ll need a stockpot if you’re going to make your own stock,
                      and it is also useful for blanching vegetables.
                      H EAVY-D UTY F OR K:    This can be either one of those giant two-pronged
                      forks that come with a knife as a carving set or just a large serving fork.
                      The purpose of it is to test the doneness of braised meats: if the meat falls
                      off the fork, it’s done.
                      CH I NA CAP: Not essential but nice to have around, this is a large conical
                      ﬁne-mesh metal strainer that is very handy for straining braising liquids.




     China Cap art TK




30   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                        S T O C K E XC H A N G E :
                        T he

                    REAL K I T C H E N Solutions




W       hen French cuisine came to America, there was a lot of talk

about fine homemade stocks being the indispensable basis for great

food. This certainly makes sense in the context of French cooking, because that cuisine
revolves around the “mother sauce” system, and a mother sauce not only requires a stock,
it depends upon it for its depth of ﬂavor. As a result, cooking instructors in this country con­
stantly hammered on the importance of real homemade stock.
       There’s no doubt that this is an important concept. But it is also a little Franco-
centric. After all, there are many ﬁne cuisines in which stock is far from central. Besides, in
today’s world, the practicalities involved in making a stock are difﬁcult for most people. If
we were to insist that our dishes only be made with homemade stock, a lot of these excel­
lent dishes would simply not get cooked. So we’re taking a different position on the stock
question. We acknowledge its importance as a base for braises, stews, and soups, but we’re
looking at it more from the point of view that it is important to use some ﬂavorful liquid as
this base. Now, there are many different ways to get a ﬂavorful liquid into the pot, and we
like to think that our dishes can be very successful whether you make your own stock in the
classic tradition, use souped-up canned chicken broth, or even just go with plain old canned
broth “as is.” And in most cases, you will be braising or stewing in the liquid anyway, so the
cooking process itself will add plenty of ﬂavor to it.



                                                                                                   31
                        Our advice, then, is this: If you have a roast chicken, throw the carcass in the freezer;
                then you can always use it later to make a stock. In fact, get in the habit of doing the same
                thing any time you have leftover bones from meat, or chicken wing tips, or even just the
                odd piece of meat. Even if you don’t feel up to going the whole nine yards, you can adopt
                our favorite approach: Take some canned chicken stock and enrich it with the standard aro­
                matic vegetables (carrots, celery, onion) plus any piece of meat or bones that you have left
                over or have frozen from previous cooking sessions.
                        But the decision is really up to you. Listed in descending order of ﬂavor intensity,
                here are your stock options. If you don’t have time or inclination to make the best, just sub­
                stitute one farther down the line.



     STOCK OPTIONS
     TH E R EAL D EAL: This is the classic approach, which will yield an intensely ﬂavorful liquid. Basically, you
        toss meaty bones and vegetables together in a roasting pan and roast them in a hot oven until they
        caramelize and turn a dark, nutty brown. You then dump the roasted mixture into a stockpot, add water,
        and simmer for a few hours. Strain out the solids, and you end up with a golden-brown stock that’s practi­
        cally rich enough to call a soup. If you cook it long enough, the bones will give up enough gelatin so that
        the stock gels completely when it’s chilled. This is the good stuff. We encourage you to make it whenever
        you have bones on hand, or time to spare, then freeze it in relatively small, airtight containers. It will keep
        for 2 to 3 months.
     S U PE R-CHAR G E D CAN N E D B R OTH: If you just don’t have the time or inclination to make your own stock,
        the next-best option is to doctor up some canned chicken broth. Toss your meat and vegetable scraps—
        bones from a roast, the ends of an onion, celery tops, parsley stems, whatever you come up with as you
        prep the rest of your recipe ingredients—into a medium saucepan with a bit of oil and brown them over
        medium heat for 8 to 10 minutes. Then pour in your favorite low-salt canned broth, add a bay leaf and
        some peppercorns, and simmer over low heat on a back burner as long as possible, until you need it for
        the recipe. Strain out the solids, and it’s ready to use. It won’t have the great color or richness of stock
        made with roasted bones, but the ﬂavor will be deeper and more complex than broth straight from the can.
     N O-STOCK STOCK: Even if you don’t have canned stock, you can still make the most out of those meat and
        vegetable trimmings. Follow the same procedure as in Super-Charged Canned Broth above, but substi­
        tute wine, beer, or even water for the canned broth.
     CAN N E D C H I C K E N B R OTH : Use it straight from the can . . . it’s better than plain water. It is also more ﬂa­
        vorful than canned beef broth, and much easier to get your hands on than lamb or veal stock. We advise
        you to use a low-salt version, since you may be reducing it quite a bit, a process that causes full-salt ver­
        sions to end up being way too salty.
     OT H E R L I Q U I D S : Sometimes stock is not required to make a ﬂavorful liquid for a stew or braise. Wine,
        beer, and fruit juices all add a lot of ﬂavor to the pot. Our favorite is beer, since it has a particular afﬁnity
        for meat and adds real body to the liquid as well. Beer is particularly handy in those situations when you
        have used some stock but don’t have any more, and the dish needs more liquid. Don’t fuss, just toss in a
        beer.
     WAT E R : No explanation needed. It’s got no ﬂavor, it’s got no body, but making a stew or braise with water is
        better than not making it at all.




32              H OW T O C O O K M E AT
The Real Deal Recipe
     M A K E S A B O U T 2 Q UA R T S


     4 pounds meaty raw beef, pork, lamb, or veal bones, depending on the type of stock you are
        making (or chicken backs, necks, and giblets)
     2 tablespoons olive oil (optional)
     1 large onion, unpeeled, quartered
     2 stalks celery, roughly chopped
     2 medium carrots, roughly chopped
     2 tablespoons tomato paste
     1⁄ 2   cup dry white wine (or substitute dry red wine, beer, or water)
     10 black peppercorns
     1 bay leaf
     4 sprigs fresh thyme (or 1 ⁄ 2 teaspoon dried thyme)
     10 sprigs fresh parsley
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     2 cloves garlic, unpeeled (optional)
     3 to 4 quarts cold water


     1. Preheat the oven to 500°F. Place a large roasting pan in the oven to preheat.

     2. Rinse the bones and dry them well. Add the oil to the pan if you are using it, then
add the bones, vegetables, and tomato paste. Roast until the bones and vegetables are well
browned and caramelized, 20 to 30 minutes.
      3. Transfer the contents of the roasting pan to an 8-quart stockpot and place the roast­
ing pan on the stove. Add the wine to the roasting pan and bring to a simmer over medium-
high heat, stirring to dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan. Add to the
stockpot, along with the remaining seasonings.
      4. Add enough cold water to cover the ingredients by a few inches, partially cover the
pot, and bring to a simmer. Simmer beef stock for about 6 hours, chicken, lamb, pork, or
veal stock for about 4 hours, skimming any scum that rises to the surface and adding hot
water if the liquid evaporates below the surface of the ingredients. Do not allow the stock
to boil.
      5. When the vegetables and bones have given up all the ﬂavor they can, remove the
pot from the heat. Place a colander over another large pot or saucepan and pour the stock
into it. Lift out the colander and discard the solids. Strain the stock again, through a ﬁne-
meshed sieve this time, to remove any remaining solids. Taste and correct the seasoning,
then chill. When the stock is cold, remove the layer of fat that will have formed on the sur­
face.




                                             THE STOCK EXCHANGE: REAL KITCHEN SOLUTIONS           33
                                                                               BEEF:
                                          A M E R I CA’ S                      M E AT



N      o doubt about it, Americans love beef. For reasons of geography,

history, and cultural identity, beef has become the emblematic food of

our country. For reasons of personal background, we’re hooked on it too.
       Being raised in Iowa, I (Doc) grew up to the sound of T-bone steaks sizzling and spit­
ting in the broiler. Those fat steaks, cut from local steers and stored in our family spot at the
meat locker downtown just off Main Street, were the default meal, the one my parents
made when they wanted something really good but didn’t want to put a lot of work into it.
Stately rib roasts were the culinary centerpiece of choice for non-holiday celebrations, and
pot roasts in various guises were the gold standard for warming winter meals. We even had
barbecued beef ribs, though it required a drive to Lincoln, a town of about four hundred
people located some ten miles from our house, where we could sample Carl’s locally
famous version.
       And anybody who knows me (Chris) very well at all knows that if I am allowed to
select the restaurant where we go to dinner, I will almost always be choosing a place where I
can get a shrimp cocktail, a baked potato, a green salad, and a big, juicy steak. That’s the food
of my tribe (the WASP). Roast beef on Sunday with my grandparents, steak on the week­
ends with my family, hamburgers for lunch almost every day—that’s my culinary heritage.
       When I think of beef, I think of all the steaks, from sirloin to Delmonico to strip to



                                                                                                    35
     skirt, and even the grilled round steak that sustained me for a period in my youth. I think of
     braised brisket, juicy roast rump, and tender braised short ribs. I remember the steamship
     rounds I carved as a buffet worker in Miami Beach, the hundreds of sirloin steaks I cooked
     at a dinner theater where I once worked, the ﬁfteen prime ribs I would roast every night at
     the resort hotels. If you ask me, to be a professional cook in America is to work with a lot of
     beef, and to live in America is to eat a lot of beef.
             Now, we don’t mean to give the impression that only Americans are fond of beef.
     No less an authority than Carême, the great nineteenth-century French chef, declared beef
     “the soul of cooking,” and it’s an important part of the daily culinary repertoire in coun­
     tries from Vietnam to Argentina. But when you’re cooking beef in America, you’ve deﬁ­
     nitely got the home court advantage.
             The standard explanation for the popularity of beef among Americans is that the
     ﬁrst colonists, being from England, had an unusual fondness for it, which they passed on to
     their descendants. There is some truth to that, but not much; in fact, the English of that day
     liked mutton as much as beef. The real source of our national obsession with beef lies
     much farther west, in Mexico and present-day Texas.
             When Spanish missionaries fanned out from Mexico through the southwestern
     United States, they brought cattle with them. As they later retreated from these missions,
     they left the cows behind. By the early eighteenth century, there were large herds of wild cat­
     tle roaming through the region. Known as Texas longhorns, they had developed, over many
     generations of long-range foraging in scrubland, an ability that would prove pivotal to the
     future of America: They could walk all day through all kinds of weather without tiring.
             The ranchers who corralled and redomesticated these animals decided to put the
     walking prowess of their new breed to good use. They resolved to walk them all the way
     from their grazing lands in Texas to the ready markets to the north. Thus began the amaz­
     ing American phenomenon that is the source of much of our national mythology, the “cat­
     tle drive.”
             By any measure, these drives were monumental endeavors. Starting from the enor­
     mous ranches in Texas, a handful of cowboys would drive huge herds of up to twenty-ﬁve
     hundred cattle as far as ﬁfteen hundred miles, a journey that could take two, three, or even
     four months. Although the life of the cowboys was actually rather squalid, dirty, and
     unpleasant, these ornery cusses seized the imagination of a country still trying to deﬁne its
     destiny. Their feats became legendary and, for better or worse, the ideals of independence,
     rugged individualism, and can-do optimism that are at the heart of America’s self-image
     were largely formed in and around the cattle drive. Along the way, beef became forever
     entwined with our sense of national identity.
             The next stage was considerably less romantic. Seeing an opportunity for proﬁt,
     wealthy entrepreneurs from Europe and the East bought up huge tracts of land in the West
     and Midwest and set about creating an industry out of a legend. Before long, a new form of
     restaurant, the steak house, became all the rage from New York to San Francisco. America
     had begun its love affair with beef. Today, it is our country’s most popular meat by a wide
     margin.



36   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
        Like pork, though, today’s beef is considerably different from the beef that our
ancestors ate.
        In the 1960s, nutritionists and others began to raise health concerns about the
amount of saturated fat in the American diet, particularly from beef. The resulting demand
for healthier beef caused producers to embark on an intensive program designed to come
up with a less fat-laden product.
        Their efforts have worked remarkably well. Through crossbreeding, modiﬁcations
in feeding programs, and more extensive trimming of external fat prior to sale, producers
have reduced the fat in today’s beef by 27 percent compared to twenty years ago. Of course,
this makes for a somewhat less ﬂavorful and less tender product. The beef industry has
tried to address the tenderness issue by bringing cattle to slaughter earlier. To deal with the
somewhat lower ﬂavor quotient, we recommend the tactics described earlier in the book:
Use some of the tougher but more ﬂavorful cuts, cook bone-in cuts, and sear hard at the
beginning of cooking.
        Rich, juicy, eminently adaptable, and possessed of a unique, deep ﬂavor, beef is the
taste of home to many Americans. Fortunately, there are plenty of ways to enjoy it. The
huge variety of choices and the high quality that is routinely available make beef a very
good place to start experimenting with all kinds of cuts.


       ABOUT CUTS OF BEEF


                   Tough but Flavorful Section
                                        Big Money Section
                                                    Steak Section   Roast Section




         Because a steer is so much larger than a lamb or a pig, its muscles are separated
into many more individual cuts. That translates into a whole lot of options at the meat
counter; you could cook beef every night of the week for months without repeating your­
self. It also translates into a confusing situation. So, let’s start by sorting out the parts of the
steer and what well-known cuts come from each one.
         The steer is divided into four main parts: the chuck, which is the shoulder and arm
from the neck back through the ﬁrst ﬁve ribs; the rib, which includes the rib cage from the
sixth through the twelfth ribs; the loin, which is the center and rear section of the back; and
the round, which is the butt and leg. When a steer is butchered, it is cut lengthwise in half,



                                                                         B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   37
     creating two sides of beef. Each of these is then cut into the four cuts we just described,
     making a total of eight per steer. These are the primal cuts.
             In line with our “keep it simple” approach to understanding parts of meat ani­
     mals, we recommend you think of the four major sections of the steer like this: the
     chuck, which happens to be the primal that we champion, is the Tough But Flavorful Sec­
     tion; the rib is the Big Money Section; the loin is the Steak Section; and the round is the
     Roast Section.
             The chuck, which is the equivalent of your neck, upper arms, and shoulders, is a
     tough part of the steer, riddled with connective tissue developed by the exercise involved in
     moving the animal around. This part of the beast is a primary source of ground beef as
     well as stew meat. It is also the source of relatively large cuts, such as 7-bone blade roast and
     chuck shoulder roast, that are perfect for braised dishes like pot roast. The brisket, which is
     at the bottom of the chuck, is also a great piece of meat for braising. Going against type,
     there are also a couple of relatively tender large cuts in the chuck, including the chuck eye
     roast and the chuck top blade steak.
             Next comes the rib, which is the equivalent of your rib cage. This area is far more
     tender than the chuck, in fact the most tender part of the whole animal. It includes the
     very pricey standing rib roast, a.k.a. prime rib, which is why we call this the Big Money
     Section. If you cut the standing rib roast into steaks, you get Delmonico, or rib-eye,
     steaks, which are among our favorites. The tough but meaty ends of the ribs become
     short ribs. (You can also get short ribs from the chuck, but don’t worry about that at this
     point.)
             The loin, which corresponds to your lower back, is also very tender. The three pri­
     mary sections of the loin are the top loin muscle, the tenderloin muscle, and the sirloin,
     which corresponds to the hip. Here is where you get all the steaks you know best, from ﬁlet
     mignon to porterhouse to T-bone and all the variations on sirloin steak.
             Finally comes the round, which is the equivalent of your butt and leg. This is the one
     primal cut that is sometimes used as a retail cut—if you have ever been at a buffet where a
     guy in a funny little white hat was carving up what looked like a giant leg, you have actually
     seen a round. But, like the other primals, the round is usually carved up into smaller sec­
     tions. Most of them are suitable for roasting, including the eye round roast, rump roast, and
     top round roast. You also see a steak come out of here for summer grilling, along with
     some stew meat and some braising cuts from the bottom round. This is also another major
     source for ground beef.
             By this point, you should have a general idea of how the cow is divided up. So let’s
     look in a little more detail at the cuts in terms of how they are best cooked, which is
     the way you’ll actually deal with them in your kitchen.
             When it comes to roasts, you have to start with the Monarch of Roast Beef, the
     standing rib roast. As you now know, this majestic cut comes from the rib section of the
     cow. With its wonderfully rich, beefy ﬂavor, it is a bedrock American favorite, ﬁt for any cel­
     ebratory occasion. Roasts taken from the short loin area, including the Châteaubriand, the
     full tenderloin, and the top loin roast, are also right up there in terms of both tenderness



38   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
and ﬂavor. For a slightly less exalted but still excellent roast, try the tender rump roast, the
surprising chuck eye roast, and the classic eye of round, ideally suited for roast beef sand­
wiches.
         For braising and stewing, the chuck is the section to turn to time after time. From
chuck arm roasts to beef shoulder pot roast to the full and half brisket, cuts from this part
of the beast have a tremendous amount of full, deep ﬂavor. They are excellent choices for
long, slow moist cooking, an approach that turns them from tough and gnarly to tender
and succulent. Short ribs, which can come from several different parts of the steer, have all
of these same ﬂavor virtues plus a bone, which is always an added advantage. Cuts from the
bottom round, such as the bottom round steak, are also good braising material, although a
little chewier than those from the chuck.
         In the same way, just about any cut from the chuck, when cut into cubes, makes
wonderfully ﬂavorful stew meat. If for some reason you can’t locate a decent cut of chuck,
top and bottom round also work well in stews.
         When you’re talking about grilling, sautéing, or broiling beef, you’re talking about
steaks. Of course the best known of these come from the Steak Section, the loin, and in par­
ticular from the short loin, which is the portion of the loin nearer the front of the steer.
When the extremely tender tenderloin muscle from this area is cut into steaks, it becomes
ﬁlet mignon. The top loin muscle, when cut into steaks, is the ever-popular New York strip,
which also goes by many other names. The legendary porterhouse and T-bone steaks are
cut vertically from the top to the bottom of the short loin, so they include portions of both
the top loin and the tenderloin muscle. From the sirloin, the rear section of the loin, come
the best-value steaks in terms of price, sometimes a little chewy but with really good ﬂavor.
Sirloin steaks come in many varieties. If cut in the traditional way, they are named for the
portion of the bone they contain. If cut in the modern boneless fashion, they are named for
the particular muscle that they come from, primarily top sirloin and bottom sirloin. Steaks
from other sections of the cow include the very ﬂavorful Delmonico from the rib area, the
surprisingly tender chuck top blade steak, and the top round steak, the only cut from the
round that achieves the tenderness quotient needed for high-heat cooking.
         There are also several steaks that do not ﬁt the traditional image because they are
relatively long, ﬂat pieces of meat. These steaks—the ﬂank, the skirt, and the hanger
steak—all run more or less horizontally along the sides of the steer. All three have recently
gone from neglected to very popular. We are big fans of the skirt steak and the ﬂank steak,
both of which have tremendous ﬂavor and enough fat to make them juicy. The hanger
steak, on the other hand, goes in our category of world’s most overrated steaks, along with
the newly popular tri-tip.
         Before we leave the tender cuts of beef, we want to say a word or two about done-
ness and thickness.
         When we cook tender cuts of beef, the roasts and the steaks, we like them rare to
medium-rare, but on the rare side. Because this is our book, the recipes are geared to that
state of doneness. But just because that’s our preference doesn’t mean you have to go along
with it. Each recipe also gives instructions for cooking the meat longer, so go ahead and



                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   39
     cook it to whatever degree of doneness you fancy. Just remember that as the meat sits after
     it comes out of the oven or off the ﬁre, it is going to move up about one degree of done-
     ness. So if you want your steak medium, remove it from the heat when it’s medium-rare.
             Speaking of steaks, you will notice that we usually specify very thick ones in our
     recipes. That’s because with a nice thick piece of meat you can get a good strong sear on the
     exterior without overcooking the interior. We encourage you to seek out a butcher who
     will cut steaks thick for you. But if that doesn’t work out, you can go with a thinner version
     and just shorten the cooking time. In that case, though, be particularly sure you check for
     doneness early and often so you don’t take your meat past the point you want it to be.
             The one cut of beef we do cook more thoroughly is ground beef. This can come
     from virtually any part of the steer, but most often it is from the round or the chuck. Again,
     the best quality in terms of ﬂavor and meat/fat ratio comes from the chuck. We like to
     combine this super-popular meat with spicy ﬂavors.
             Finally, there are the so-called variety cuts of beef. Although not for everybody, they
     are actually quite delicious when you give them a chance. From tripe to beef heart to
     tongue to the meltingly tender, supremely indulgent marrow from the shin bone, every one
     of them is well worth exploring. Not to be forgotten is the oxtail, actually the tail of the
     steer, which has powerful beef ﬂavor and is becoming increasingly popular as more cooks
     realize its taste potential.
             The basic message here is that if you like meat, there is some cut of beef out there
     that is going to be calling your name every time you stroll up to the meat counter or walk
     in the door of the butcher shop. The only thing you have to do is pick it out.


            OU R TOP 5 FAVOR ITE CUTS OF B E E F

            1. 3-pound porterhouse steak

            2. Rump roast

            3. Delmonico steak

            4. Brisket

            5. Skirt steak



            BUYING BEEF

             The large selection of beef cuts is a great resource for the cook but, as we said
     above, it can also create a lot of confusion. Since there are so many distinct ways to separate
     the many muscles that make up a steer, butchers in different locations have developed quite
     different approaches. Beef is not butchered the same way in Italy and France as it is in this
     country, for example, and yet another method is used in South America.
             There’s no need to go that far aﬁeld to ﬁnd variations, though. Butchers on the East
     Coast tend to cut beef somewhat differently from those in the West. That means, for


40   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
instance, that the tri-tip roast is commonplace in San Francisco supermarkets but rarely
seen in markets in Boston. Butchering techniques also change over time. The sirloin, which
a few years ago was routinely cut into bone-in steaks, is now most often made into boneless
cuts with very different names. (See page 100 for more details.)
         What this all means is that, particularly when it comes to beef, it pays to get to know
your butcher. If you don’t have a butcher shop handy, this is the time to strike up a relation­
ship with the guy behind the meat counter in the supermarket. Challenge him to help you
out, and the chances are good that he will respond with enthusiasm. The ability of super­
market butchers to supply exactly the cut of beef you want is limited by the fact that much
of their meat comes from the supplier prebutchered and wrapped in Cryovac, but a little
effort will get you more than you might suppose.
         In addition to locating the particular cut that you want, there are a number of fac­
tors to consider in selecting the individual piece of meat. Let’s start with the USDA grade,
because beef is the one meat where this is actually a relevant factor for the consumer. As we
mentioned earlier, the USDA grade is an indication not of the safety of the meat, but of its
palatability—in other words, how much you will like it when you bite into it. The assump­
tion is that beef that is younger and that has more intramuscular fat (marbling) will be more
tender, juicy, and ﬂavorful and therefore more appealing.
         Grading is voluntary and the producer has to pay the USDA to do it. But since there
is such a wide variety of tenderness and quality in beef, it is worth it for the producers more
often than not. Beef can receive one of eight grades, but only the top three—Prime,
Choice, and Select—are of high enough quality to be sold in supermarkets and butcher
shops, so those are the only ones you need to consider.
         In point of fact, you can pretty much forget about Prime beef for home cooking. You
will rarely ﬁnd it even at high-end butcher shops. Only about 2 percent of all beef receives
that rating, and most of it is sold to upscale restaurants and steak houses here and in Japan.
         But that still leaves you with a very good option. USDA Choice beef remains the
standard of excellence in most of the world, and 45 percent of meat that is actually graded
receives the Choice designation. Our advice (which you should feel free to ignore, of
course) is to seek out Choice beef when you can ﬁnd it. It is particularly important when
buying tender cuts of meat such as a big, thick porterhouse steak or a standing rib roast,
where the degree of marbling will really make a very noticeable difference. When it comes
to the tougher cuts of beef, on the other hand, Select is quite suitable.
         But that’s not quite the whole story, as I (Doc) found when I took a “Beef 101”
course sponsored by Texas A & M University. Along with the other students, I got to evalu­
ate a steer on the hoof, assign it a USDA grade after it was slaughtered, and ﬁnally cut it into
primal cuts, a process that professionals refer to as “fabrication.”
         In the process of doing all this, I discovered something about quality grades that
makes common sense, but that I had not thought about before: There is almost as much
leeway within the grade as between grades. Professionals talk not just about “Choice” beef,
but about “High Choice,” “Choice,” and “Low Choice.” In the supermarket or butcher
shop, though, those gradations are lost, and all you get is the designation of “Choice.” This
means that it makes sense to look carefully at individual pieces of meat even if they are


                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   41
     graded the same. For the same money, you may be able to pick out a porterhouse that has a
     moderate amount of marbling, versus one that has only a small amount. The difference in
     tenderness and juiciness will be substantial. So when buying steaks, in particular, look for a
     good amount of white fat distributed evenly inside the muscle in small ﬂecks and streaks.
     This is the ideal of marbling.
             But what about beef that is not marked with any grade in the market? Well, much of
     it is what people in the business call “No Roll.” What this means is that the beef in question
     was not high enough quality to receive a grade of either Prime or Choice, which are the
     two grades that command a premium price. Therefore, the packer told the USDA inspector
     not to bother rolling his ofﬁcial grading stamp down the carcass. The No Roll beef sold in
     markets in this country is almost uniformly Select.
             Another option when buying beef is to choose a so-called branded meat. Like grad­
     ing, branding is much more prevalent with beef than with other meats. The brand can refer
     to a speciﬁc producer, such as Nieman Ranch, or a speciﬁc breed, such as Angus or Here­
     ford. Only by tasting the meat in question can you decide whether it is worth buying a par­
     ticular brand. In our opinion, breed branding is a somewhat more reliable guide, since
     several cattle experts told us that the #1 predictor of high-quality, well-marbled beef is the
     breed of the steer from which the meat comes. We recommend you try any speciﬁc
     branded breeds you see in the market, then decide for yourself what you think.
             There are also some general guidelines when buying beef, regardless of grade or
     brand. Always look for meat that is a rich cherry or slightly brownish red in color, with a rel­
     atively thin layer of external fat that is white rather than brownish or darkened. The surface
     of the beef should look moist but not wet or sticky, and if you are buying prewrapped beef,
     beware of those with a lot of liquid in the container, which generally means the meat has
     been frozen and then thawed. Above all, beef should smell fresh, with no sour or stale
     odors.
             Beef stores better than other red meats. It will keep in the refrigerator, tightly
     wrapped, for three to four days, and can be frozen, again tightly wrapped (see page 27) for
     up to a year. Because it does slowly lose moisture in the freezer, though, it’s best to use it
     after a month or two.
             As we hope we’ve shown, there are many good reasons why beef is America’s
     favorite red meat. So drop that old notion of the hierarchy of values, and you’ll ﬁnd your­
     self ending up with an awful lot of great meals. You may only have beef once or twice a
     week, but if you pay a little attention to how you buy and cook it, you’re deﬁnitely going to
     enjoy it every time.




42   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                        RECIPES FOR
          LARGE TENDER CUTS OF BEEF

 Grill-Roasted Rib Roast (Prime Rib) with Potato-Garlic Hobo   10 STEPS TO GREAT
                                                               ROASTED BEEF
                           Pack, Sour Cream, and Bacon Bits
                                                                1. Preheat the oven.
           Boneless Rib Roast “Prime Rib–Style” au Jus with
                                                                2. Dry the meat.
                                          Yorkshire Pudding
                                                                3. Season the meat well.
 Cumin-Crusted Roasted Châteaubriand with Wild Mushrooms
                                                                4. Put the roast on a rack
                                               and Madeira
                                                                   in a roasting pan, set
                                                                   on the middle shelf of
Sage-Rubbed Roasted Loin of Beef with Shallot-Bourbon Sauce        the preheated oven,
                                                                   and sear it.
                Grill-Roasted Whole Loin of Beef with Yellow
                                                                5. Turn down the oven
                                        Tomato–Ginger Jam
                                                                   temperature.

Garlic-Studded Roasted Eye of Round with Sweet Potatoes and     6. Add the vegetables,
                        South American Parsley-Caper Sauce         if any.

                                                                7. Check for doneness
 Latin-Flavored Roasted Chuck Eye Roast with Lime-Chipotle
                                                                   early and often.
                             Marmalade and Fried Plantains
                                                                8. Transfer the meat to a
             Rump Roast on a Bed of Red Onions, Leeks, and         platter, cover loosely
                                                                   with foil, and allow to
                                               New Potatoes
                                                                   rest for 10 to 20
                                                                   minutes, depending on
                                                                   size.

                                                                9. Pour off the excess fat
                                                                   from the pan, add
                                                                   stock, deglaze, and
                                                                   simmer to reduce the
                                                                   liquid.

                                                               10. Carve and serve,
                                                                   passing the jus
                                                                   separately.




                                                                                         43
THE CUT

Although it is known in
                                 Grill-Roasted Rib Roast (Prime
every country club and
steak house as “prime rib,”
                                 Rib) with Potato-Garlic Hobo
we call this cut a rib roast
because the “prime” in its       Pack, Sour Cream, and Bacon Bits
more familiar name actu­
ally refers to the USDA                  S E RVE S 6 TO 8

grade. Every cow has 13
ribs: Ribs 1 through 6 are       This is the Big Daddy of roast beef, the most expensive and the most well
in the arm and shoulder
area, and ribs 6 through 12
                                 marbled cut of them all. When cooked over live ﬁre so that it picks up a nice
are in the upper breast.         smoky ﬂavor, it is about as ﬁne an eating experience as a carnivore can imag­
(Rib 13 is in the short loin     ine. We call here for a bone-in roast, which is better suited to the rigors of
and ﬂank.) A rib roast con­
sists of all or some portion
                                 grill-roasting than the boneless version, and accompany it with a hobo pack
of ribs 6 through 12. This is    that’s an updated version of the classic roast beef accompaniment, baked
an expensive cut of meat,        potatoes with sour cream and bacon.
so we recommend getting
it from a butcher shop
                                         As always when grill-roasting, be sure that no part of the meat is
rather than a supermarket.       directly over the coals. It’s also a good idea to put the thicker side of the roast
                                 toward the ﬁre for three quarters of the cooking time, then turn it around.
OTHER NAMES                              If you have butcher’s twine, tie the roast at both ends, simply making
Standing rib roast, oven-
                                 loops of twine parallel to the bone. This helps ensure that the outer ﬂap of
ready rib roast.
                                 meat doesn’t pull away from the rib-eye muscle during cooking. It’s mostly a
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           matter of appearance, so it’s not crucial, but it does give you a better-looking
Sorry, but there is really no    roast in the end.
substitute here.                         If you don’t want to mess with a charcoal ﬁre, you can do both the rib
                                 roast and the hobo pack in the oven at a straight 400°F, increasing the cook­
BUTCHERSPEAK
                                 ing times by about 10 percent. Or (a better choice), you can grill-roast the
The beef rib roast has both
a small end, which comes         beef but serve it with a straight-up baked potato.
from the area near the loin
farther down the body of                 One 4-rib rib roast, about 6 to 8 pounds
the cow, and a large end,                6 tablespoons kosher salt
which comes from closer
                                         6 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
to the shoulder. Many peo­
ple recommend the smaller                F O R T H E H O B O PA C K
end, which has a bit less fat
                                         6 large baking potatoes, washed and quartered lengthwise
and is slightly more tender,
but we like the shoulder                 16 garlic cloves, peeled
end, which is marginally                 1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh sage
less tender but has just a               1⁄ 3   cup olive oil
bit better ﬂavor. So if you
want to impress your                     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
butcher, ask him for a
large-end beef rib roast.




44             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      FOR THE GARNISH                                                                      COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE
      1 cup sour cream                                                                    Leftover prime rib makes
      1 ⁄2   cup minced fresh chives                                                      the best cold roast beef
                                                                                          sandwich in the entire
      8 slices bacon, cooked until crisp and crumbled
                                                                                          world. Or you can do as
                                                                                          Chris’s grandmother did—
     1. Light a ﬁre on one side of a large kettle grill, using about enough               cut up the leftover beef and
charcoal to ﬁll a large shoe box.                                                         toss it with lettuce and a
                                                                                          vinaigrette for an excellent
       2. Dry the roast with paper towels, then rub it all over with the salt             lunch salad. If you’re a fan
                                                                                          of bones, try leaving a bit
and pepper, pressing gently to be sure that it adheres. When the ﬁre has
                                                                                          of extra beef on the ribs
died down and the coals are covered with white ash, place the roast bone                  and roasting them in a
side down on the side of the grill away from the coals, being very careful                350°F oven for about 20
that none of the meat is directly over the coals. Put the lid on the grill and            minutes, then gnawing off
                                                                                          the meat. Now, there’s a
open the vents about one quarter of the way. Cook, adding a handful of
                                                                                          real treat.
fresh charcoal about every 30 minutes, until the roast is done the way you
like it, about 1 hour and 40 minutes to 2 hours for rare. To check for done-
ness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast and let it
sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is
medium-rare, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-
done; we like to pull it at 122°F. When the roast is done to your liking,
remove it from the grill, cover it loosely with foil, and allow it to rest for 20
minutes or so before carving.
      3. While the roast is cooking, make the hobo packs: Tear off eight
sheets of heavy-duty foil, each about 2 feet long, and stack them one on
top of the other. Arrange half the potatoes, garlic, and sage in the center
of the top sheet, drizzle with half of the olive oil, and season with salt and
pepper. Fold up the top four sheets of foil around the vegetables one after
the other, turning the package one quarter turn after each one and making
sure that each sheet is well sealed around the vegetables. Repeat this
process with the remaining potatoes, garlic, and sage.
      4. Place the hobo packs in the coals around the periphery of the ﬁre,
where the heat is less intense. Pile the coals up around the packs and cook
until the potatoes are tender, about 40 minutes.
     5. Remove the hobo packs from the coals, unwrap the packages, and
garnish the potatoes with the sour cream, chives, and bacon.
     6. Slicing between the ribs, cut the beef into big thick slices. Serve
accompanied by the potatoes.




                                                                        B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T         45
THE CUT

This is the justly famed
                                  Boneless Rib Roast “Prime
“prime rib,” the same cut
that is used for the Grill-
                                  Rib–Style” au Jus with
Roasted Rib Roast (page
44), but with the bones           Yorkshire Pudding
removed. Since “prime”
really refers to the USDA                 S E RVE S 8 TO 12

grade, we just call it a rib
roast.                            This is the prime rib out of central casting, the King of Roast Beef. Here we
                                  use the boneless version, which is easier for inside cooking, and roast it on a
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                  bed of vegetables so that it creates a lot of ﬂavorful pan drippings to make a
As with the Grill-Roasted
Rib Roast, there is really no     delicious jus, the French term for the natural juices that come out of a piece
substitute for this magniﬁ­       of meat as it cooks. We like to leave the jus nice and light in texture, just
cent cut of meat.
                                  reduced slightly rather than thickened with ﬂour and butter.
                                          We accompany the beef here with the traditional British Yorkshire pud­
                                  ding, which is not a pudding at all, but sort of a cross between a soufﬂé and
                                  a popover. To give the Yorkshire pudding a nice, puffy consistency as well as
                                  a richer ﬂavor, we heat up some of the fat from the beef in a mufﬁn tin, then
                                  pour the pudding batter on top of the hot fat and return it to the oven. Just be
                                  careful not to spill the fat when you are moving the mufﬁn tin around.
                                          If you’re looking for a shortcut here, you can skip the Yorkshire pudding
                                  and just serve the beef by itself, or accompany it with corn mufﬁns or store-
                                  bought dinner rolls.

                                          One 8-pound boneless rib roast
                                          1⁄ 2   cup kosher salt
                                          1⁄ 2   cup freshly cracked black pepper
                                          2 medium onions, peeled and thickly sliced
                                          2 large carrots, peeled and diced large
                                          3 stalks celery, diced large
                                          2 plum tomatoes, cored and diced large
                                          10 garlic cloves, peeled

                                          F O R T H E YO R K S H I R E P U D D I N G

                                          4 large eggs
                                          11 ⁄ 2 cups milk
                                          11 ⁄ 2 cups all-purpose ﬂour
                                          3 ⁄4   teaspoon kosher salt, or to taste

                                          F OR TH E SAU CE
                                          1⁄ 2   cup dry red wine
                                          3 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                          Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste



46              H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1. Preheat the oven to 400°F.                                                       COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

                                                                                        If you have any leftovers
      2. Dry the meat with paper towels, then rub it all over with the salt             from this dinner, you are a
and pepper, pressing gently to be sure they adhere. Place the meat on a                 very lucky cook. Slice the
sturdy rack in a medium roasting pan and arrange the onions, carrots, cel­              meat thin and serve it cold
                                                                                        with horseradish sauce, or
ery, tomatoes, and garlic around it. Place in the oven and cook until well
                                                                                        use it to make stroganoff,
browned, about 20 minutes. Reduce the oven temperature to 300°F, stir                   or cube it and make a very
the vegetables around, and roast until the meat is done the way you like it.            luxe roast beef hash.
Start checking for doneness after 1 hour, but with a roast of this size it may
take about an hour and 20 minutes for rare. To check for doneness, insert
a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast and let it sit for 5
seconds, then read the temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is medium-rare,
134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like
to pull it at 122°F.
     3. Meanwhile, make the Yorkshire pudding batter: In a medium
bowl, beat the eggs until foamy. Add the milk and whisk to combine. Add
the ﬂour and salt and stir just to combine. Cover and refrigerate.
      4. When the roast is done, remove it from the pan, cover it loosely
with foil, and set it aside to rest for 20 minutes or so. Raise the oven tem­
perature to 450°F.
      5. Skim the fat off the juices in the roasting pan and reserve; set the
pan of drippings aside. Pour about 1⁄4 cup of the skimmed fat into a 12-cup
mufﬁn tin, dividing it evenly among the cups. Put the mufﬁn tin into the
oven for 3 to 5 minutes to get the fat hot, then pour the cold batter into the
cups on top of the fat—watch out for spattering—ﬁlling each cup about
three quarters full. Put the mufﬁn tin back into the oven and bake for 15
minutes. Reduce the oven temperature to 350°F and bake for about 15
minutes more, until the puddings are puffy and dark golden brown.
      6. While the puddings are baking, place the roasting pan, with the
drippings, over high heat. Add the wine and bring to a simmer, stirring to
dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan. Add the beef
stock, bring back to a simmer, and reduce by about one third, 10 to 15 min­
utes. Season the sauce with salt and pepper and strain it into a gravy boat;
discard the vegetables.
     7. Carve the beef into slices about 1 inch thick and serve with the
Yorkshire pudding to soak up the jus.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T         47
THE CUT

To get a Châteaubriand,
                                 Cumin-Crusted Roasted
you cut off the head of the
tenderloin, then cut off
                                 Châteaubriand with Wild
some slices for ﬁlet
mignon, then cut out a sec­      Mushrooms and Madeira
tion that you roast and call
Châteaubriand. The tender­               S E RVE S 4

loin is the least-used mus­
cle in the cow, so it is         If the prime rib is the King of Roast Beef, then the Châteaubriand, which is
extremely tender. Like the
prime rib, this is a very
                                 the French name for a roast cut from the center of the tenderloin of beef, is
deluxe, very expensive cut       the Prince. Maybe even the Heir Apparent. This is incredibly tender and has a
of beef, which makes it          very delicate beef ﬂavor, so we just roast it with some vegetables, then serve
worthwhile to go to your
butcher rather than trying to
                                 it with a rich sauce of mushrooms and Madeira. To give it a touch of the
ﬁnd it in the supermarket.       exotic, though, we added a simple coriander rub for the exterior of the beef.

OTHER NAMES
                                         One 21 ⁄ 2-pound center-cut beef tenderloin roast
                                         1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt
Filet mignon roast, full ten­
derloin roast.                           1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper
                                         1 ⁄4   cup cracked coriander seeds
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                         1 onion, peeled and diced small
You won’t be substituting
                                         1 carrot, peeled and diced small
anything for this. Often imi­
tated but never duplicated,              1 stalk celery, diced small
the beef tenderloin has no               11 ⁄ 2 pounds wild mushrooms of your choice (porcini, portobellos,
substitutes.                                   chanterelles, morels, shiitakes, etc.), stems removed and reserved, thinly
                                               sliced
                                         1 plum tomato, cored and diced small
                                         3 tablespoons olive oil

                                         F OR TH E SAU CE

                                         2 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                         2 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                         1 small red onion, peeled and diced small
                                         1⁄ 3   cup Madeira wine
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                         1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

                                        2. Dry the meat with paper towels, then rub it all over with the salt,
                                 pepper, and coriander, pressing gently to be sure they adhere. Place the
                                 roast on a sturdy rack in a medium roasting pan. Scatter the onion, carrot,
                                 celery, mushroom stems, and tomato around the meat and drizzle the
                                 olive oil over the vegetables. Place in the oven and roast until the meat is
                                 well browned, about 20 minutes. Reduce the oven temperature to 300°F,
                                 stir the vegetables around, and roast until the meat is done to your liking,


48             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
15 to 25 minutes more for rare. To check for doneness, insert a meat ther­               COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

mometer into the dead center of the roast and let it sit for 5 seconds, then            This beef is so tender you
                                                                                        can cut it with a fork. If you
read the temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is
                                                                                        cooked your Châteaubriand
medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull it                rare, you can take advan­
at 122°F. When the meat is done to your liking, remove it from the pan,                 tage of its texture by slicing
cover it loosely with foil, and allow it to rest for 10 to 20 minutes while you         any leftovers very thin and
                                                                                        serving them carpaccio­
prepare the sauce.
                                                                                        style, sprinkled with salt
      3. Place the roasting pan with the vegetables in it on the stove over             and pepper, drizzled with
                                                                                        really good olive oil, and
medium-high heat. Add the beef stock and bring to a boil, then reduce the
                                                                                        dotted with grated Parme­
heat to medium and simmer for 15 minutes, stirring to dissolve the brown                san cheese and/or capers.
crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan. Strain and reserve the stock; discard            Oh, yeah.
the vegetables.
      4. In a large sauté pan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the
red onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.
Add the mushrooms and cook, stirring occasionally, until they are cooked
but not mushy, 5 to 7 minutes more. Add the Madeira and simmer until
slightly reduced, 3 to 5 minutes. Add the reserved stock and simmer for 3
minutes more. Season with salt and pepper.
      5.   Slice the beef into slices about 1 inch thick and serve with the
sauce.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          49
THE CUT

The beef loin is right up
                                 Sage-Rubbed Roasted Loin of Beef
there next to the prime rib
as one of the best cuts for
                                 with Shallot-Bourbon Sauce
roasting, a good intersec­
tion of tenderness and ﬂa­               S E RVE S 6

vor. This is where most of
the meat in a porterhouse        A beef loin is such a magniﬁcent piece of meat that it is usually cut up into
or T-bone steak comes
                                 steaks, but here we use it as a deluxe roast. Before roasting, the meat is
from, as well as New York
sirloin and strip steaks.        rubbed with a little sage and garlic to give it a nice crust. It is served with a
                                 newly classic American pan sauce that I (Chris) learned from my friend and
OTHER NAMES                      mentor Bob Kinkead, now chef/owner of Kinkead’s in Washington, D.C. Be
Beef top loin roast.             careful when you put the bourbon back on the stove when making the sauce,
                                 because you will get a ﬂare-up of ﬂames. But don’t worry, this is just the alco­
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                 hol burning off, and it will die down quickly.
You can substitute a rib
roast (prime rib) or basi­
                                         1⁄ 2   cup kosher salt
cally any tender boneless
                                         1⁄ 2   cup freshly cracked black pepper
beef roast such as the ten­
derloin, bottom sirloin, or              1⁄ 2   cup chopped fresh sage
even the chuck eye roast.                1 ⁄4   cup chopped garlic
                                         One 4- to 5-pound boneless top loin roast
BUTCHERSPEAK
                                         2 medium onions, peeled and thickly sliced
With this cut, you probably
want to ask the butcher for              2 medium carrots, peeled and diced large
a rib end rather than a loin             3 stalks celery, diced large
end, which we prefer
                                         2 plum tomatoes, cored and diced large
because it is slightly more
tender. Also, ask him to                 3 tablespoons olive oil
leave a good 1 ⁄4 inch of fat
                                         F OR TH E SAU CE
on the roast. You might
also see a whole strip loin              3 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
in the supermarket, which                2 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus (optional) 2 tablespoons, cut into
you can use in this recipe if               2 chunks
you’re cooking for a larger              1⁄ 3   cup minced shallots
group.
                                         1 cup bourbon
                                         1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                         1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

                                       2. In a small bowl, combine the salt, pepper, sage, and garlic and mix
                                 well. Dry the meat with paper towels, then rub it all over with this mix­
                                 ture, pressing gently to be sure it adheres. Place the roast on a sturdy rack
                                 in a medium roasting pan. Rub the onions, carrots, celery, and tomatoes
                                 with the olive oil, then scatter them around the meat. Place in the oven
                                 and roast until the meat is well browned, about 20 minutes. Reduce the



50             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
oven temperature to 300°F, stir the vegetables around, and continue to                   COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

roast until the meat is done to your liking, about 30 to 40 more minutes for            Leftovers from this roast
                                                                                        can be used in the same
rare. To check for doneness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead cen­
                                                                                        way as those from the
ter of the roast and let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature:               prime rib (page 46) or
120°F is rare, 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-                  Châteaubriand (page 48).
well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull it at 122°F. When the roast is            Or you can just slice the
                                                                                        meat and serve it cold with
done, remove it from the pan, cover it loosely with foil, and allow it to rest
                                                                                        some grainy mustard, a
for 20 minutes or so while you prepare the sauce.                                       loaf of good bread, and
                                                                                        some salad, and you’ve got
      3. Pour off and discard the fat from the roasting pan, leaving the veg­
                                                                                        yourself a very classy
etables as well as the brown stuff stuck to the bottom of the pan. Place the            lunch.
roasting pan on the stove over medium-high heat, add the beef stock, and
bring to a simmer. Continue to simmer, stirring to dissolve the brown
crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan, until reduced by about half, 10 to 15
minutes. Strain and reserve the stock, discarding the vegetables.
      4. In a large sauté pan, melt the 2 tablespoons butter over medium
heat. Add the shallots and cook, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7
to 9 minutes. Take the pan completely away from the stove (unless you
want singed eyebrows) and add the bourbon. Return the pan to the heat
and simmer for 3 to 5 minutes. Add the reserved stock and simmer until
reduced by half, about 7 minutes more. Remove from the heat and add the
remaining 2 tablespoons butter bit by bit if desired, stirring until it melts
completely. Stir in the parsley and season with salt and pepper.
     5. Cut the roast into slices about 1 ⁄ 2 inch thick and serve, passing the
sauce on the side.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T        51
THE CUT

See Sage-Rubbed Roasted
                                 Grill-Roasted Whole Loin of Beef
Loin of Beef (page 000) for
a description of this cut
                                 with Yellow Tomato–Ginger Jam
and how to buy it. In many
larger supermarkets, this                S E RVE S 10 TO 15

cut will be set out all Cry­
ovacked and ready to go.         When I’m feeding a large group, I (Chris) like to serve a roast rather than
A raw pound will end up
                                 individual steaks, because that way you can focus all of your cooking atten­
yielding about 12 ounces
of cooked meat, so if            tion on a single piece of meat. And this is just the roast to make. It’s a very
you’ve got heavy meat            impressive outdoor roast and a sure way to win friends and inﬂuence peo­
eaters, you should ﬁgure a
                                 ple. The spice mix, which is a variation on the classic Southern barbecue
full pound of uncooked
meat per person.                 spice rub, has some nice sweetness along with its spiciness, and it forms a
                                 fantastic crust on the outside of the meat as it cooks. To complement the
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           roast’s rich, deep, smoky ﬂavor, we serve a kind of sweet-and-sour tomato
You can substitute any ten­      jam alongside it.
der beef roast in this
recipe, adjusting the cook­              You are grill-roasting here, so when you put the meat on the grill, be
ing time according to the        sure that none of it is directly over the ﬁre. If it is, the fat and juices dripping
size, of course.                 into the ﬁre will create smoke with an unpleasant ﬂavor (as opposed to the
                                 delicious smoke ﬂavor that comes from the coals themselves). For even cook­
                                 ing, it’s also a good idea to switch the roast around, end to end, once about
                                 halfway or so through the cooking process.
                                         You can serve this roast without the jam, but the two are so great
                                 together that it makes more sense to make the jam ahead if you think you will
                                 be pressed for time. It will keep, covered and refrigerated, for 4 to 5 days. The
                                 jam is also excellent with any other beef dish, so if you make a double batch,
                                 you are likely to use it up with no problem.
                                         Try serving this with baked beans and coleslaw for a down-home, coun­
                                 try-style meal that will knock their socks off.

                                         FOR THE JAM
                                         1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                         1 large red onion, peeled and thinly sliced
                                         2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                         3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                         1⁄ 2   cup dark raisins
                                         5 medium yellow tomatoes, cored and diced large (or substitute red
                                            tomatoes or 2 pints yellow cherry tomatoes, quartered)
                                         1 cup white vinegar
                                         1⁄ 2   cup orange juice
                                         1⁄ 3   cup lightly packed brown sugar
                                         2 tablespoons ground coriander




52             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)                                         COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                              You can slice any leftover
                                                                                         portion of this roast very
                                                                                         thin and serve it up as a
      3 ⁄4   cup kosher salt                                                             kind of super-classy barbe­
      3 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper                                            cue sandwich on white
      1⁄ 2   cup paprika                                                                 bread with coleslaw and a
      1 ⁄4
                                                                                         little hot sauce.
             cup ground cumin
      1 ⁄4   cup ground coriander
      1 ⁄4   cup sugar
      One 12-pound whole beef loin, fat trimmed to 1 ⁄ 2 inch


       1. Make the jam: In a large a sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-
high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and cook, stirring fre­
quently, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic, ginger, and
raisins and continue cooking for 1 minute. Add the tomatoes, vinegar,
orange juice, brown sugar, and coriander and simmer, stirring occasion­
ally, until the mixture has a jamlike consistency, about 30 minutes. Remove
from the heat, add the lime juice, season with salt and pepper, and set
aside. (You can store the jam in the refrigerator, covered, for up to 5 days.)
      2. In a small bowl, combine the salt, pepper, paprika, cumin, corian­
der, and sugar. Dry the meat with the paper towels, then rub it all over
with this mixture, pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
      3. Light a ﬁre in a large kettle grill, with the coals well over to one
side of the grill, using about enough coals to ﬁll a shoe box.
      4. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are covered with white
ash, place the roast on the side of the grill away from the coals, being care­
ful that none of the meat is directly over the coals. Put the lid on the grill,
opening the vents about one quarter of the way. Cook, adding a handful of
fresh charcoal about every 30 minutes, until the meat is done to your lik­
ing, about 50 to 70 minutes for medium-rare. To check for doneness, insert
a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast and let it sit for 5
seconds, then read the temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is medium-rare,
134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like
to pull it at 122°F. When the roast is done, take it off the grill, cover it
loosely with foil, and allow it to rest for 20 minutes or so before carving.
    5. Cut the beef into slices about 1 ⁄4 to 1 ⁄2 inch thick and serve with the
tomato-ginger jam.




                                                                       B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T        53
THE CUT

The eye round, which
                                    Garlic-Studded Roast Eye of
comes from the hip of the
cow, is a bit chewy. Since it
                                    Round with Sweet Potatoes and
has very little intramuscular
fat, it also has less beefy         South American Parsley-Caper
ﬂavor than other cuts.
However, it is an inexpen­          Sauce
sive way to get a roast beef
and it is nice sliced very                 S E RVE S 6 TO 8
thin and used, like “deli”
roast beef, for sandwiches.
                                    Our friend Bill Cramp does not cook a lot, but one thing he is an expert on is
Since it has so little fat, it is
best not to cook it past rare       roast beef sandwiches, his absolute favorite food. At least twice a month,
or medium-rare. One of the          Cramp will cook an eye round roast and put it in the refrigerator so he can
great advantages of this
                                    make sandwiches whenever he likes. Over many years of this habit, Cramp
roast is that you can get it
anywhere; it would not be           has developed the theory, which we share, that the cooking time for roasts
all that surprising to see it       depends not on weight, but on shape. Eye round roasts are always roughly
show up at a convenience
                                    the shape of a smallish football, so no matter how many pounds a particular
store.
                                    roast may weigh, Mr. Cramp, who likes his meat very rare, always cooks it for
OTHER NAMES
                                    exactly one hour.
Round eye pot roast.                       You can follow Mr. Cramp’s style if you like, or you can use a meat ther­
                                    mometer and make sure the roast is done to your liking before taking it out of
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE              the oven. We can only say that the reason we use this cut as a dry-cooked
You can substitute any
                                    roast, while other cooks might ﬁnd it too tough, is because on those frequent
beef roast here with excel­
lent results. We particularly       occasions when Mr. Cramp brings a cold eye round roast to our poker nights,
like the roasts in the sirloin      it is exceedingly popular and disappears like magic.
area, such as the bottom
                                           Here we pair this relatively inexpensive roast with a ﬂavorful parsley-
round rump roast and the
top round roast in this             caper sauce that is a favorite in Argentina and Uruguay, both countries where
recipe.                             beef is king. It is super-delicious on any kind of beef, and it’s also great driz­
                                    zled over these roast sweet potatoes.

                                           One 5-pound beef eye of round
                                           10 garlic cloves, peeled and halved lengthwise
                                           1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt, plus more to taste
                                           1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper, plus more to taste
                                           1 ⁄4   cup ground cumin
                                           4 large sweet potatoes, peeled and halved lengthwise
                                           3 tablespoons vegetable oil
                                           Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                           F OR TH E SAU CE
                                           1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                           1 tablespoon minced garlic




54               H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1 ⁄4   cup capers, rinsed and drained                                              COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE
     1⁄ 3   cup extra virgin olive oil                                                 This cut of beef was born
     1 ⁄4                                                                              to be roasted on the week­
            cup red wine vinegar
                                                                                       end, put in the refrigerator,
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                             and used for roast beef
                                                                                       sandwiches morning, noon,
     1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.                                                     or midnight. Or try it as a
                                                                                       substitute meat in a Head
      2. Dry the meat with paper towels. With a paring knife, make 20                  Cheese Reuben (page 158).
small slits in the surface of the roast, and push a piece of garlic into each
one. Rub the roast all over with the salt, pepper, and cumin, pressing gen­
tly to be sure they adhere. Place the roast on a sturdy rack in a medium
roasting pan and place in the oven.
     3. Once the roast goes in the oven, rub the sweet potatoes with the
vegetable oil and sprinkle them generously with salt and pepper. After 10
minutes, open the oven, place the sweet potatoes around the roast, and
cook for 10 minutes longer.
        4. Reduce the oven temperature to 300°F and continue roasting until
the meat is done to your liking, about 50 minutes total cooking time for
rare. To check for doneness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead cen­
ter of the roast and let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature:
120°F is rare, 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-
well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull it at 122°F. When the meat is
done to your liking, remove it from the oven, cover it loosely with foil, and
let it rest for 20 minutes or so while you make the parsley sauce.
     5. In a small bowl, combine the parsley, garlic, capers, olive oil, and
red wine vinegar, mix well, and season with salt and pepper.
     6. To serve, slice the meat very thin against the grain. Drizzle the
meat and sweet potatoes with parsley sauce, and pass the remaining sauce
on the side.




                                                                     B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          55
THE CUT

This is basically a boneless
                                 Latin-Flavored Roasted Beef
rib roast cut from the cen­
ter (the “eye”) of the ﬁrst
                                 Chuck Eye Roast with
ﬁve ribs. It comes from the
chuck, or forequarter, of the    Lime-Chipotle Marmalade and
cow. This is an area where
the muscles work pretty          Fried Plantains
hard to move the cow
around, so chuck has a                   S E RVE S 6
whole lot of ﬂavor but is
not always real tender.
                                 We like to think of this dish as a “bargain roast in designer clothes.” It has a
Because of this, many
cooks would not choose to        wonderful combination of ﬂavors from Latin America. If you can get hold of
use a section of the chuck       whole cumin and coriander seeds, by all means use them, and crack the
as a roast. But this particu­
                                 coriander seeds yourself—they really contribute a wonderful aroma and ﬂavor
lar cut makes a great roast,
and in fact it may well be       to the dish. To crack coriander seeds—or any other spice seeds, for that mat­
the very best value in the       ter—you can either use a pepper mill set on the very coarsest setting, or you
cow—it is both very ﬂavor­
                                 can put the seeds on a cutting board and roll back and forth over them with
ful and quite tender.
                                 the edge of a small sauté pan or frying pan.
OTHER NAMES
                                         As for the chipotles, we are going to admit here, for the ﬁrst time in pub­
Inside chuck roll, boneless      lic, that canned chipotles in adobo sauce are our absolute favorite chiles.
chuck roll, boneless chuck       They have a deep, penetrating smoky heat that makes just about any dish
ﬁllet.
                                 taste better. And while the fried plantains may seem a bit difﬁcult, after you’ve
                                 made them once, you will want to be making them all the time. They are really
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

You can substitute any           pretty easy, and not only do they taste great, but smashing them lets you
beef roast here.                 work out some of the stress of daily life.
                                         If you don’t have time to make the marmalade, you could substitute a
BUTCHERSPEAK
                                 quick fresh preparation like Tomato-Cucumber Relish (page 275) or your
If you go to a butcher shop
and ask for this cut, you
                                 favorite fresh salsa.
will deﬁnitely be impress­
                                         FOR THE MARMALADE
ing the butcher, because
he’ll know that you are in               4 plum tomatoes, cored, peeled, and diced large
search of one of the great               2 small limes, halved lengthwise and very thinly sliced
underappreciated cuts of                 11 ⁄4 cups sugar
meat.
                                         1 tablespoon minced canned chipotles in adobo
                                         1 tablespoon adobo sauce from the chipotles
                                         2 tablespoons fresh lime juice (about 1 lime)
                                         Kosher salt to taste

                                         1 ⁄4   cup paprika
                                         1⁄ 2   cup cumin seeds, toasted in a dry skillet over medium heat, shaken
                                                frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes
                                         1⁄ 3   cup cracked coriander seeds
                                         1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt



56             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper
      One 31 ⁄ 2- to 4-pound beef chuck eye roast

      F O R T H E P L A N TA I N S

      2 cups vegetable oil
      2 green plantains, peeled and cut into 2-inch rounds
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


       1. Make the marmalade: In a medium saucepan, combine the toma­
toes, sliced limes, and sugar. Cook slowly over low heat, stirring occasion­
ally, for about 3 hours, until thick, glossy, and pretty much the consistency
of jam.
     2. Add the chipotles, adobo sauce, lime juice, and salt and mix well to
combine. Set aside to cool to room temperature. (You can store the mar­
malade in the refrigerator, covered, for up to 2 weeks.)
      3. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

      4. In a small bowl, combine the paprika, cumin seeds, coriander
seeds, salt, and pepper and mix well. Dry the meat with paper towels, then
rub it all over with this mixture, pressing gently to be sure it adheres. Place
the roast on a sturdy rack in a medium roasting pan and roast until the
meat is well browned, about 20 minutes. Reduce the oven temperature to
300°F and continue roasting until the meat is done to your liking, about 30
minutes more for rare. To check for doneness, insert a meat thermometer
into the dead center of the roast and let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the
temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is medium,
150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull it at 122°F.
When the roast is done to your liking, remove it from the oven, cover it
loosely with foil, and let it rest for about 20 minutes while you prepare the
plantains.
      5. In a small saucepan, heat the oil until very hot but not smoking.
Drop the plantain rounds into the oil 4 or 5 at a time and cook until well
browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Remove them from the oil and drain on paper
towels or a brown paper bag. Then place each fried round on a work sur­
face and, using a heavy object such as a small cutting board or sauté pan,
apply steady pressure to mash it as ﬂat as a pancake. Put the mashed plan­
tain sections back into the hot oil, 2 or 3 at a time, and cook for 2 minutes
or so, until the entire surface is golden brown. Remove, drain on paper
towels or a brown paper bag, and season liberally with salt and pepper.
      6. Thinly slice the meat (about 1 ⁄4 inch thick) against the grain and
serve with the fried plantains and marmalade.



                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   57
THE CUT

The name says it all here—
                                 Rump Roast on a Bed of Red
this cut comes from the
rump of the cow. To our
                                 Onions, Leeks, and New Potatoes
taste buds, this is the most
ﬂavorful as well as the                  S E RVE S 6

most tender cut from the
round, which is the              The ﬁrst time we made this straightforward dish, there were six of us eating
hindquarters of the beast
                                 dinner together, and every one of us made the same comment: “Now, this is
from the ankle to the rump.
You can ﬁnd this cut rela­       what roast beef should taste like.” That doesn’t necessarily mean that this is
tively easily in a supermar­     the absolute “best” roast beef (whatever that might be), but it does mean that
ket.
                                 this is the texture and ﬂavor our taste memories call up when we imagine a
                                 beef roast. We’re willing to bet that they will match yours too. The vegetables
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

You can substitute any of        in this dish are also outstanding, because as the roast cooks, its juices seep
the beef round roasts, such      out and are absorbed by the vegetables around it. When you want a classic
as the beef round tip roast      roast beef, this is it.
or the beef round bottom
roast, as well as boneless               Serve this with a big green salad and a side of Hoppin’ John (page
chuck eye roast.                 421).

                                         One 4- to 5-pound beef rump roast, well trimmed
                                         2 tablespoons kosher salt, plus more to taste
                                         2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper, plus more to taste
                                         2 medium red onions, peeled and thinly sliced
                                         5 leeks (white part only), cleaned well and cut into very thin strips
                                         1 ⁄4   cup minced garlic
                                         4 plum tomatoes, cored and diced medium
                                         12 red new potatoes (about the size of golf balls), halved
                                         1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                         1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh herbs: any one or a combination of parsley,
                                                basil, oregano, and/or sage
                                         1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)


                                         1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

                                      2. Dry the meat with paper towels, then rub it all over with the salt
                                 and pepper, pressing gently so they adhere. Place it on a sturdy rack in a
                                 medium roasting pan and roast until it is well browned, about 20 minutes.
                                       3. Meanwhile, in a large bowl, toss the onions, leeks, garlic, toma­
                                 toes, and potatoes with the olive oil and salt and pepper to taste. When the
                                 roast reaches the 20-minute mark, reduce the oven temperature to 300°F,
                                 arrange the vegetables in the roasting pan around the meat, and continue
                                 roasting until the meat is done to your liking, 40 to 50 minutes longer for
                                 rare. To check for doneness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead cen-



58             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
ter of the roast and let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature:                COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

120°F is rare, 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-                  If you happen to have
                                                                                        fewer people come to din­
well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull it at 122°F. When the roast is
                                                                                        ner than you expected, so
done to your liking, remove it from the oven, cover it loosely with foil, and           that you have not only
let it rest for 20 minutes or so.                                                       meat but some of the veg­
                                                                                        etables left over, you can
    4. While the roast is resting, toss the vegetables with the herbs and               cut everything into rough
lemon juice and correct the seasoning if needed.                                        cubes, toss it all in a hot
                                                                                        sauté pan with a couple of
      5. Thinly slice the roast against the grain. Place a portion of the veg­          minced chile peppers, and
etable mixture on each plate, fan the meat slices out over it, and serve.               have yourself a really ﬁne
                                                                                        hash. Like the other beef
                                                                                        roasts, this also makes
                                                                                        wonderful sandwiches the
                                                                                        next day.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T         59
                               RECIPES FOR
                               LARGE TOUGH CUTS OF BEEF

10 STEPS TO GREAT BRAISED      Old-fashioned Braised Beef with Herbed Potato Dumplings and
BEEF
                               Horseradish Sauce
 1. Dry the meat.
                               Cuban-Style Braised Beef Blade Steak with Olives, Raisins,
 2. Season the meat well.
                               and Fried Sweet Potatoes
 3. Sear the meat hard.
                               Old-School Yankee Pot Roast with Root Vegetables and Fresh
 4. Transfer the meat to a
                               Tomato-Fennel Relish
    platter, adjust the
    amount of fat in the
    pot, and sauté the         Balsamic-Braised Pot Roast with Tomatoes, Lemons, Raisins,
    aromatics and              and Black Olive–Pine Nut Relish
    vegetables.
                               Lazy Sunday Pot Roast with Caraway and Green Apples
 5. Deglaze the pot with
    some of the liquid.
                               Barbecued Whole Beef Brisket with Pastrami-Style Rub and
 6. Return the meat to the     Grainy Mustard–Horseradish Sauce
    pot along with enough
    liquid to cover it about   Braised Beef Brisket with Sauerkraut
    halfway.
                               Black Pepper–Crusted Wine-Braised Short Ribs with Garlic
 7. Bring to a simmer, skim
    off the ﬁlm, cover the     and Turnips
    pot, and place in a
    300°F oven.                Orange-Braised Short Ribs with Fennel Seeds and Oregano

 8. Check for doneness
                               Puerto Rican Vinegar-Braised Flank Steak with Cabbage,
    early and often: Look
    for “fork-tender.”
                               Corn, and Yucca Salad

 9. Skim the fat and any       Flintstones-Style BBQ Beef Ribs with Hot, Sweet, and Sour
    ﬁlm from the liquid and,   Bone Sauce
    if you want, remove the
    meat and reduce the
                               Sweet-and-Sour Braised Bottom Round Steak with Eggplant
    liquid; season to taste.
                               and Ginger
10. Carve the meat and
    serve with the braising
    liquid on the side.




60
Old-fashioned Braised Beef with                                                              THE CUT

                                                                                            We are calling for a bone­

Herbed Potato Dumplings and                                                                 less beef shoulder here.
                                                                                            There are several cuts that

Horseradish Sauce                                                                           come from the shoulder
                                                                                            and work really well in this
                                                                                            application; our favorites
      S E RVE S 6                                                                           are the arm pot roast and
                                                                                            the shoulder pot roast.
This is a pretty classic approach to a large, relatively tough but ﬂavorful cut of          This is deﬁnitely a super­
                                                                                            market cut.
beef. We like to use a cut from the chuck because it has plenty of good ﬂavor,
and the long, slow cooking makes it tender. It also has enough fat to keep it                OTHER NAMES
from drying out.                                                                            For arm pot roast, chuck
      The braising liquid here is very ﬂavorful, and it’s great to have some nice           arm roast; for shoulder pot
                                                                                            roast, honey cut cross-rib
spongy dumplings to really soak up that tasty liquid. The dumplings will turn out
                                                                                            roast, shoulder roast, Eng­
best if you cook the potatoes ahead and refrigerate them overnight.                         lish roast.

      1 ⁄4   cup vegetable oil, or more if needed
                                                                                             OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
      One 31 ⁄ 2- to 4-pound boneless beef shoulder roast                                   You can use pretty much
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                                 any boneless cut from the
      2 medium onions, peeled and diced large                                               shoulder or neck of the
                                                                                            cow here, particularly those
      2 carrots, peeled and diced large
                                                                                            with “pot roast” in their
      4 stalks celery, diced large                                                          name. These include the
      4 allspice berries                                                                    neck pot roast, 7-bone pot
                                                                                            roast, under blade pot
      2 bay leaves
                                                                                            roast, cross-rib pot roast,
      Stems from 1 bunch parsley                                                            and top blade pot roast.
      Big pinch of black peppercorns
      About 5 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)

      F OR TH E SAU CE
      1⁄ 2   cup sour cream
      3 tablespoons prepared horseradish
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh dill
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      FOR THE DUMPLINGS

      2 to 3 large eggs
      2 pounds baking potatoes, cooked in their jackets in salted water until
         tender, drained, and refrigerated overnight
      2 to 21 ⁄ 2 cups all-purpose ﬂour
      1 tablespoon kosher salt
      2 teaspoons freshly grated nutmeg
      3 to 4 fresh chives, ﬁnely chopped
      2 tablespoons ﬁnely chopped fresh parsley



                                                                          B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          61
                               1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

                             2. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot with a
                       lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.
                       Dry the meat with paper towels, sprinkle it generously with salt and pep­
                       per, place it in the Dutch oven, and brown well, 5 to 8 minutes per side.
                       When it is nicely browned, transfer the meat to a platter.
                              3. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total of
                       about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions, carrots, and celery and cook,
                       stirring occasionally, until the onions are lightly browned, 11 to 13 minutes.
                             4. Return the beef to the pot and add the allspice, bay leaves, parsley
                       stems, and peppercorns. Add enough stock to come halfway up the sides
                       of the meat (about 4 cups). Bring to a simmer, scraping any browned bits
                       off the bottom of the pan. Skim any scum off the surface, then cover,
                       place in the oven, and cook until the meat is very tender, 2 to 21⁄ 2 hours.
                       Begin checking for doneness after 2 hours. To check for doneness, plunge
                       a fork straight down into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork
                       slides out easily, the meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it
                       more time.
                            5. While the meat is braising, make the sauce and dumplings. For the
                       sauce, combine all the ingredients in a medium bowl and mix well. Cover
                       and refrigerate until serving time.
                             6. For the dumplings, crack 2 eggs into a large bowl and beat them
                       lightly with a fork. Peel the potatoes and press them through a potato ricer
                       (or ﬁnely grate them by hand) into the bowl with the eggs. Add 2 cups of
                       the ﬂour and the salt, nutmeg, chives, and parsley. Work the ingredients
                       together to form a ﬁrm dough, adding another egg, lightly beaten, if the
                       dough is too dry.
                             7. Before forming the dumplings, give the dough a “test run”: Bring a
                       small pot of water to the boil. With wet hands, form a 2-inch round
                       dumpling and drop it into the boiling water. If the dumpling falls apart,
                       work a bit more ﬂour into the dough; if not, form about 15 more 2-inch
                       dumplings. Place the formed dumplings on a baking sheet, cover, and set
                       aside until the meat is done.
                             8. When the meat is done, remove it from the pot, cover it loosely
                       with foil, and set it aside. Skim the fat from the braising liquid and strain the
                       liquid into a large saucepan. Add the remaining 1 cup stock to the braising
                       liquid and bring to a boil over high heat. Add 2 tablespoons salt and drop in
                       the dumplings one at a time. Reduce the heat to a simmer and let the




62   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
dumplings poach gently until they ﬂoat to the surface, about 12 to 15 min­
utes. As they are done, remove them from the pot with a slotted spoon.
      9. Slice the meat into 1 ⁄ 2-inch-thick slices and arrange on individual
plates. Top each serving with 2 piping-hot dumplings and a spoonful of
the chilled horseradish sauce and serve at once, passing the braising liquid
separately.


Cuban-Style Braised Beef Blade                                                                THE CUT

                                                                                             The bone-in beef blade

Steak with Olives, Raisins, and                                                              steak, as its name implies,
                                                                                             comes from the blade por­
                                                                                             tion of the chuck. The
Fried Sweet Potatoes                                                                         chuck is basically the neck,
                                                                                             shoulder, and arm of the
     S E RVE S 4                                                                             animal. It is ideally suited
                                                                                             to braising, because it has
                                                                                             plenty of good beef ﬂavor
When we think of braises, we tend to think of European-style dishes, but this
                                                                                             and the long, slow cooking
one has a deﬁnite Cuban beat. With the raisins and olives and the beefy                      makes it tender. The blade
chuck meat, it has a great combination of sweet and earthy ﬂavors, and the                   steak comes from the por­
                                                                                             tion of the chuck nearest to
fried sweet potatoes round it all out. We would serve this with a simple salad
                                                                                             the rib section, which means
of arugula, tomatoes, and blue cheese.                                                       it is a little bit more tender
                                                                                             than other chuck cuts. This
     2 tablespoons olive oil                                                                 cut (or one of the substi­
     One 21 ⁄ 2- to 3-pound bone-in beef blade steak (or other bone-in chuck                 tutes discussed below)
       steak), 2 to 3 inches thick                                                           should be readily available
     2 tablespoons cumin seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground cumin)                                at any supermarket.

     2 tablespoons kosher salt
                                                                                              OTHER NAMES
     2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
                                                                                             Chuck steak (or roast)
     2 cups dry red wine
                                                                                             1st cut.
     1 cup tomato juice
     1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped pitted green olives (with or without pimientos)               OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
     1⁄ 3   cup dark raisins                                                                 Other options from the
                                                                                             blade section of the chuck
     F O R T H E S W E E T P O TA T O E S                                                    include the top blade
     2 large sweet potatoes                                                                  steak, also known as the
     1 ⁄4   cup vegetable oil                                                                7-bone steak, and the
                                                                                             under blade steak, also
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper                                            called the California steak.
                                                                                             Any other bone-in steak
     1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.                                                           from the chuck will also
                                                                                             work well here. You can
      2. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot with a                     also use any bone-in chuck
lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.                      roast, as long it is thin
                                                                                             enough.
Dry the meat with paper towels and rub it all over with the cumin, salt,



                                                                           B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T           63
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE            and pepper. Place it in the Dutch oven and brown well on both sides, 8 to
If you are a fan of             10 minutes per side.
empanadas, those little
savory turnovers popular in           3. Meanwhile, combine the red wine and tomato juice. When the
Mexico and South America,       meat is browned, add enough of this liquid to the Dutch oven to come
leftovers from this dish
                                halfway up the sides of the meat. (If you have some of the mixture left
make a fantastic ﬁlling.
                                over, reserve it to add later; if there is not enough, just add water.) Add the
                                olives and raisins and bring to a simmer, scraping any browned bits from
                                the bottom of the pan. Skim any scum from the top. Cover, place in the
                                oven, and braise until the meat is very tender, 1 to 11⁄ 2 hours, checking for
                                doneness after 1 hour. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down
                                into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the
                                meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
                                     4. While the meat is cooking, place the sweet potatoes on a small
                                baking sheet and bake until they are easily pierced with a fork but still offer
                                some resistance, about 45 minutes. Remove the potatoes from the oven
                                and allow them to cool. As soon as they are cool enough to handle, cut
                                them lengthwise into quarters.
                                      5. When the meat is done, remove it from the cooking liquid, cover
                                it loosely with foil, and let it rest for 10 to 20 minutes.
                                      6. Meanwhile, taste the braising liquid; if the liquid needs more ﬂa­
                                vor, place the pot on the stove over medium-high heat and simmer to
                                reduce the liquid, then season to taste. For a thicker sauce, reduce it until it
                                coats the back of a spoon.
                                      7. While the braising liquid is reducing, heat the vegetable oil in a
                                large sauté pan over medium-high heat until it is very hot but not smok­
                                ing. Add the sweet potatoes and fry until they are brown and crisp, about 3
                                minutes. Remove to paper towels or a brown paper bag and sprinkle with
                                salt and pepper.
                                      8. Cut the meat into slices about 1 inch thick, arrange on plates, and
                                moisten with the braising liquid. Serve with the sweet potatoes, passing
                                the remaining braising liquid separately.




64            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Old-School Yankee Pot Roast with                                                              THE CUT

                                                                                             The boneless rump roast,

Root Vegetables and Fresh                                                                    which, as its name implies,
                                                                                             comes from the rear hip of

Tomato-Fennel Relish                                                                         the animal, is a little bit
                                                                                             more expensive than cuts
                                                                                             from the chuck, but it will
      S E RVE S 6                                                                            give you a very ﬂavorful pot
                                                                                             roast. This is a cut that
Some meat dishes have stood the test of time for very good reasons, and this                 should be easy to ﬁnd in
                                                                                             the supermarket.
is one of them. It is deﬁnitely a case in which the blending of several ingredi­
ents creates a whole new ﬂavor dynamic, the earthy ﬂavors of the root veg­                    OTHER NAMES
etables mixing wonderfully with the rich, beefy ﬂavor of a roast that starts out             Round tip roast, back of
a bit gnarly but ends up falling-apart tender. Here we add a relish that has                 rump roast.

some sweetness and some citrus to it, both of which help give a little jolt of
                                                                                              OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
ﬂavor to the roast, rich and mellow after all that time in the oven.
                                                                                             Any of the pot roast cuts
      Serve this with garlic bread and a salad of crisp Romaine lettuce. What                from the blade, shoulder, or
more do you need?                                                                            arm sections of the chuck
                                                                                             will also work just ﬁne
      2 tablespoons olive oil                                                                here. Also, see Pot Roast
      One 4-pound boneless bottom round rump roast                                           Options (page 68) for more
                                                                                             possibilities.
      1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt, or more to taste
      1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper, or more to taste
      4 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      1 ⁄4   cup catsup
      4 cups large-diced root vegetables: any one or a combination of onions,
         potatoes, parsnips, turnips, rutabaga, leeks, celery root, and/or acorn or
         other winter squash

      FOR THE RELISH

      1 small tomato, cored and diced small
      1 ⁄4   cup ﬁnely chopped fennel
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

      2. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot with a
lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.
Dry the meat with paper towels and sprinkle it with the salt and pepper,
pressing gently to be sure they adhere. Place the meat in the Dutch oven
and brown well, 8 to 10 minutes per side.




                                                                           B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T           65
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE                   3. Meanwhile, combine the stock and catsup and mix well. Add
This is a wonderful dish         enough of this mixture to the Dutch oven to come halfway up the sides of
when reheated. Or, if you
                                 the meat. (If you have some of the mixture left over, reserve it to add later;
have leftover beef along
with a few vegetables, use
                                 if there is not enough, add some water or beer.) Bring to a simmer and
them as substitute ingredi­      skim any scum from the surface. Cover, place in the oven, and braise until
ents in A Severe Tongue          the meat is very tender, 2 to 21⁄ 2 hours. After 1 hour and 15 minutes, add
Hashing (page 156).
                                 the root vegetables to the pot; after 2 hours, begin checking the meat for
                                 doneness. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down into the
                                 meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the meat is
                                 done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
                                       4. While the meat is cooking, make the relish: In a small bowl, com­
                                 bine the tomato, fennel, parsley, lemon juice, and salt and pepper. Mix well
                                 and set aside.
                                       5. When the meat is done, remove it and the vegetables from the pot,
                                 transfer to a platter, and cover them loosely with foil. Skim the fat from
                                 the cooking liquid. Taste the liquid, and if you think it needs more ﬂavor,
                                 place the pot on the stove over medium-high heat and simmer to reduce
                                 the liquid. For a thicker sauce, reduce it until it coats the back of a spoon.
                                 Season with salt and pepper.
                                       6. Cut the meat into thick slices and serve with the vegetables and
                                 the braising liquid, passing the relish on the side.



THE CUT

See Old-fashioned Braised
                                 Balsamic-Braised Pot Roast with
Beef (page 61) for details
on boneless beef shoulder
                                 Tomatoes, Lemons, Raisins, and
pot roast and how to buy it.
                                 Black Olive–Pine Nut Relish
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

A well-trimmed half brisket,
a rump roast, or any of the              S E RVE S 6

other roasts from the
blade, shoulder, or arm          “Pot roast” does not always have to mean beef cooked with root vegetables.
sections of the chuck will
perform very well in this
                                 The term simply refers to a tough cut of beef that is browned, then cooked in
recipe. See Pot Roast            a covered pot along with enough liquid to cover it partway. So you can add
Options (page 68) for more       ingredients to create any ﬂavor footprint that you want.
details.
                                         In this Mediterranean-style pot roast, we use several acidic ingredients
                                 that contrast with and set up the rich ﬂavor of the long-cooked beef. Lemons,
                                 balsamic vinegar, and red wine all contribute, while sweet raisins join in on
                                 the side of the beef for a complementary ﬂavor dynamic. To top it off, there’s
                                 a fresh but earthy relish for your guests to add as they want.


66             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      To segment the lemons, peel them with a sharp knife, removing the
white pith entirely. Cut between the membranes and remove each section
whole, taking care to remove the seeds.
      Serve this with crusty bread, Blue Cheese Mashed Potatoes (page
413), and a simple green salad.

      1 cup dry red wine
      3 ⁄4   cup balsamic vinegar
      1 tablespoon sugar
      1 ⁄4   cup olive oil, or more if needed
      One 4- to 5-pound boneless beef shoulder pot roast
      1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt
      1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper
      2 large red onions, peeled and diced small
      1 ⁄4   cup minced garlic
      6 plum tomatoes, cored and diced small
      1 cup dark raisins
      2 lemons, peeled, cut into segments, seeded (see headnote)
      1 to 2 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      FOR THE RELISH

      1 cup roughly chopped pitted black olives
      1 ⁄4   cup pine nuts, toasted in a 350°F oven until lightly browned, about
             10 minutes
      1 cup roughly chopped fresh basil or parsley
      1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

      2. In a medium bowl, combine the wine, vinegar, and sugar. Mix well
to dissolve the sugar and set aside.
      3. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot with a
lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.
Dry the meat with paper towels, then rub it all over with the salt and pep­
per, pressing gently to make sure they adhere. Place the roast in the pot
and brown it well on all sides, about 10 minutes total. When the meat is
browned, transfer it to a platter and set it aside.
      4. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions and cook, stirring occa­
sionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic and cook, stirring,
for 1 minute more.

                                                                              B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   67
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE                      5. Return the meat to the pot and add the tomatoes, raisins, lemons,
If you have very juicy toma­       and wine-vinegar mixture. Add enough stock so that the liquid comes
toes, there will be quite a
                                   about one quarter of the way up the sides of the meat (the tomatoes will
lot of braising liquid with
this dish, so there may be
                                   quickly give off more liquid). Bring to a simmer, scraping any browned
some left over when the            bits from the bottom of the pot. Skim any scum off the surface. Cover,
roast has all been eaten.          place in the oven, and cook until the meat is tender, 2 to 21⁄ 2 hours. Begin
Freeze it, then thaw it when
                                   checking for doneness after 2 hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork
you want some incredibly
ﬂavorful gravy to put over
                                   straight down into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides
potatoes but don’t want to         out easily, the meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more
do any work.                       time.
                                         6. While the meat is cooking, make the relish: In a medium bowl,
                                   combine the olives, pine nuts, basil, olive oil, and salt and pepper and mix
                                   well.
                                         7. When the meat is done, remove it from the pot, cover it loosely
                                   with foil, and set aside. Skim the fat from the braising liquid and taste the
                                   liquid. If it needs more ﬂavor, place the pot on the stove over medium-high
                                   heat and simmer to reduce the liquid. For a thicker sauce, reduce it until it
                                   coats the back of a spoon. Season to taste with salt and pepper.
                                         8. Cut the pot roast against the grain into thick slices, spoon some of
                                   the sauce over the top, and pass the remaining sauce and the relish sepa­
                                   rately for guests to sprinkle over the beef.



     POT ROAST OPTIONS
     When it comes to beef pot roast, there are many cuts that will do the trick. Among the best are the cuts from
     the chuck (the shoulder of the cow). One excellent option is the blade roast (also sometimes known as the
     top blade chuck roast or the 7-blade pot roast, so called because the blade bone somewhat resembles the
     number 7), which is among the most tender and ﬂavorful of all chuck pot roast cuts. Another good choice is
     the boneless chuck shoulder roast, which is a relatively tender and very ﬂavorful cut taken from the back of
     the cow’s foreleg.
         But basically any cut from the chuck will make a good pot roast, so the best idea is probably to simply
     pick the one that is the size you are looking for. Some of the more common names used for chuck roast cuts
     are: arm pot roast or boneless arm shoulder roast, chuck eye or chuck eye roll, ﬂatiron roast, cross-rib roast
     or shoulder clod, or just plain boneless chuck roast.
         Brisket is also an excellent choice for pot roast—since it has more fat than the other pot roast cuts, it can
     be cooked longer without overcooking.
         Another very good pot roast option is the rump roast, which comes from the round (the rear hip and leg
     of the cow). Other than this particular cut, though, cuts from the round tend to lack enough fat to hold up to
     the long, slow cooking without drying out.




68              H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Lazy Sunday Pot Roast with                                                                     THE CUT

                                                                                              Boneless cross-rib pot

Caraway and Green Apples                                                                      roast comes from the arm
                                                                                              half of the chuck. You
                                                                                              should be able to get this
      S E RVE S 6                                                                             cut, or some other suitable
                                                                                              boneless chuck roast, in
This is a recipe that I (Doc) found written in pencil on an index card tucked                 your supermarket.

inside my Grandmother Schwyhart’s old, worn cookbook. Like many of her
                                                                                               OTHER NAMES
best dishes, this one relies on standard components of classic German
                                                                                              Boneless English roast,
cooking put together in an interesting way. The apples are particularly nice in               boneless Boston cut Eng­
this dish; they puff up as they cook so they look like dumplings, and they                    lish roll.
really soak up the other ﬂavors.
                                                                                               OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
      We call this “Lazy Sunday” not because Grandma Schwyhart was
                                                                                              Any other boneless roast
lazy—in her late eighties, you would still ﬁnd her rising early to bake pies for
                                                                                              from the chuck would be
“those poor shut-ins” ten years her junior—but because it takes very little                   delicious here. An excellent
effort and yields a wonderful Sunday afternoon dinner when served with                        substitute, for example, is
                                                                                              the boneless shoulder pot
Roasted Potatoes (page 414).
                                                                                              roast.

      2 tablespoons oil, or more if needed
      One 4- to 5-pound boneless cross-rib pot roast or other chuck roast
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      2 medium onions, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced
      1⁄ 2   cup cider vinegar (or substitute white vinegar)
      3 bay leaves
      1 tablespoon caraway seeds
      1 ⁄4   cup packed brown sugar
      1 ⁄4   cup chopped fresh marjoram (or 2 tablespoons dried marjoram)
      2 to 21 ⁄ 2 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      4 Granny Smith or other tart green apples, quartered, cored, and peeled


      1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

      2. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot with a
lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.
Dry the meat with paper towels, sprinkle it generously with salt and pep­
per, place in the pot, and brown well, about 8 to 10 minutes per side.
When the meat is well browned, transfer it to a platter.
      3. Pour off fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have about 2
tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions and sauté, stirring, until translu­
cent, 7 to 9 minutes.




                                                                            B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T         69
                                       4. Add the vinegar and bring to a boil, scraping up any brown stuff
                                 from the bottom of the pan. Put the meat back in the pot and add the bay
                                 leaves, caraway seeds, brown sugar, marjoram, and enough stock so that
                                 the liquid comes halfway up the sides of the meat. Bring just to a simmer
                                 and skim any scum off the surface, then cover, put in the oven, and cook
                                 until the beef is fork-tender, 21⁄ 2 to 3 hours. After 2 hours and 15 minutes,
                                 add the apples to the pot; after 21⁄ 2 hours, remove the apples with a slotted
                                 spoon, set aside, and begin checking the meat for doneness. To check for
                                 doneness, plunge a fork straight down into the meat and try to pull the
                                 fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if the meat hangs on
                                 to the fork, give it more time.
                                        5. When the meat is done, remove it from the pot, cover it loosely
                                 with foil, and let it rest for at least 10 minutes. Skim the fat from the brais­
                                 ing liquid and taste the liquid. If it needs more ﬂavor, place the pan on the
                                 stove over medium-high heat and simmer to reduce the liquid. For a
                                 thicker sauce, reduce it until it coats the back of a spoon. Season with salt
                                 and pepper. (You can also strain the liquid and pass it and the cooked
                                 onions separately.)
                                       6. Cut the meat into thin slices and serve accompanied by the apples,
                                 braising liquid, and onions.



THE CUT

Brisket is a large ﬂat cut of
                                 Barbecued Whole Beef Brisket
meat that runs down the
chest of the steer just
                                 with Pastrami-Style Rub and
below the short ribs. It cor­
responds to the breast on a      Grainy Mustard–Horseradish
veal or bacon on a pig. This
is a very fatty, tough piece     Sauce
of meat, but with long, slow
cooking, it becomes deli­                S E RVE S 12 OR MOR E
cious. If you can ﬁnd a
brisket with the cap left on,
                                 This is a classic Texas barbecue technique, but here we work a little change
that is the best option,
because the cap contains a       on it by using a spice rub more typical of pastrami, and a sauce of a style
lot of your fat and connec­      more often used with roast beef. But the brisket still has that intensely smoky
tive tissues, which keep
                                 ﬂavor and the fantastic combination of a super-ﬂavorful, crusty exterior with a
this cut moist through the
long, slow dry cooking. Any      moist, tender interior that deﬁnes the appeal of barbecue. Remember that
brisket you get will have at     you gotta have patience for this process; the longer you cook this brisket, the
least 1 ⁄4 inch of surface fat
                                 better it is going to be. Just make sure that you keep the ﬁre off to one side so
on one side; don’t remove
it, because it also helps        that the meat is never actually over the coals.
keep the meat moist.                     Of course, we understand there are also occasions when you don’t



70             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
have the time but still want the brisket, so there are some possible shortcuts.                 OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

To begin with, the brine is optional here. It does give the brisket a slightly                 You can use a large half
                                                                                               brisket if you adjust the
fuller ﬂavor, but it is certainly not essential. Then, if you want to cut down your
                                                                                               other ingredients in the
time by the ﬁre, you can also use the Cheater’s Method. To do so, get in as                    recipe in proportion, but
many hours as you can with the meat on the grill with some smoky chips, say                    that’s about the only sub­
                                                                                               stitute here. If you do use a
2 to 5 hours on the evening of the day before you want to serve the brisket.
                                                                                               half, try to get the “point
Then wrap it in foil, put it in a 200°F oven, and let it sit overnight, or up to 10            cut,” also known as the
hours. That way you get some smoky ﬂavor on the beef but don’t have to                         thick cut or nose cut. It is
                                                                                               cheaper and fattier than
spend all day tending the ﬁre.
                                                                                               the “ﬂat cut,” and with this
      Serve this with fresh coleslaw, fruit salad, or a sweet potato salad.                    cooking method, both of
                                                                                               those qualities are advan­
                                                                                               tageous.
      One 8- to 10-pound beef brisket, untrimmed

      FOR THE BRINE (OPTIONAL)

      1 gallon water
      1 cup kosher salt
      3 ⁄4   cup packed dark brown sugar
      1 cup bourbon
      1 ⁄4   cup pickling spices

      FOR THE RUB
      1⁄ 2   cup kosher salt
      1⁄ 2   cup freshly cracked white pepper (or 1 ⁄4 cup ground white pepper)
      1 cup freshly cracked black pepper
      1 cup cracked coriander seeds (or 1 ⁄ 2 cup ground coriander)

      F OR TH E SAU CE
      1⁄ 2   cup grated fresh horseradish
      1 ⁄4   cup white vinegar
      1 ⁄4   cup prepared horseradish
      1⁄ 2   cup grainy mustard

       1. Rinse the brisket under cold water and dry it with paper towels. If
you are using the optional brine, combine the brine ingredients in a large
bowl or pot and mix well. Place the meat in the brine and refrigerate it for
24 to 36 hours, turning occasionally. Remove the meat from the brine and
pat it dry with paper towels.
     2. Light a ﬁre well over to one side of a large kettle grill, using enough
charcoal to ﬁll half a shoe box.
     3. In a medium bowl, combine all the rub ingredients and mix well.
Rub the brisket all over with this spice mixture, pressing gently so it
adheres.



                                                                             B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          71
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE                   4. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are covered with white
A sandwich made with rye         ash, place the meat on the side away from the coals, being careful that
bread, leftover brisket, and
                                 none of the meat is directly over the coals. Put the lid on the grill, opening
this mustard-horseradish
sauce is about as good as
                                 the vents about one quarter of the way. Cook, adding a handful of fresh
it gets.                         charcoal about every 30 minutes, for 8 to 16 hours, depending on how
                                 much time you want to devote to the process. (If the grill has a thermome­
                                 ter, keep the temperature between 180° and 220°F.) The outside of the
                                 brisket will get super-dark as it cooks, but don’t worry—it’s supposed to.
                                      5. While the brisket is cooking, place the sauce ingredients in a
                                 blender and mix well. Scrape into a small bowl and set aside.
                                        6. When the brisket is tender, remove it from the grill. To check for
                                 doneness, plunge a fork straight down into the meat and try to pull the
                                 fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if the meat hangs on
                                 to the fork, give it more time. Trim any excess fat off the brisket and slice
                                 it thin against the grain. Serve with the sauce on the side.




THE CUT

See Barbecued Whole Beef
                                 Braised Beef Brisket with
Brisket (page 70) for
details on brisket. In this
                                 Sauerkraut
case, we suggest using the
ﬂat cut half of the brisket,             S E RVE S 10

rather than the point cut,
since its leaner nature is a     This is a pretty traditional German treatment for brisket, complete with
bit better for braising.
                                 onions, sauerkraut, and prunes. We add some allspice berries and car­
                                 damom to give it a slightly more dynamic ﬂavor and use white rather than red
OTHER NAMES

Beef brisket ﬁrst cut, beef      wine to make the broth a little lighter. A half brisket will do just ﬁne here.
brisket thin cut.                        This is excellent served with Parsleyed New Potatoes (page 412) and a
                                 fresh tomato and cucumber salad to contrast with the long-cooked meat.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

A 7-bone blade chuck roast               1 small half beef brisket, about 7 pounds
is also a good option here.              Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         2 tablespoons vegetable oil
                                         8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter
                                         4 large onions, peeled and diced small
                                         1⁄ 2   cup all-purpose ﬂour
                                         2 cups dry white wine
                                         11 ⁄ 2 cups pitted prunes
                                         4 cups sauerkraut, rinsed and drained




72             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      3 tablespoons sugar                                                                  COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

      2 small bay leaves                                                                  Like most braised dishes,
                                                                                          this one reheats beautifully,
      3 allspice berries
                                                                                          but the meat also makes a
      6 cardamom seeds, crushed                                                           great sandwich, particularly
      About 2 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)                             on dark bread with a little
                                                                                          grated fresh horseradish.

      1. Preheat the oven to 325°F.

      2. Dry the brisket with paper towels and sprinkle generously with
salt and pepper. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot
with a lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smok­
ing. Add the meat and brown well on all sides, 8 to 10 minutes per side.
Transfer the brisket to a plate.
       3. Pour the oil out of the Dutch oven, then add the butter and melt it
over medium heat. Add the onions and cook, stirring occasionally, until
lightly browned, 11 to 12 minutes. Add the ﬂour and continue to cook,
stirring, for 4 minutes. Add the white wine and stir well to combine.
       4. Return the meat to the pot and add the prunes, sauerkraut, sugar,
spices, and enough stock so that the liquid comes about halfway up the
side of the meat. Bring the liquid just to a simmer, scraping up any brown
stuff from the bottom of the pan. Skim any scum from the surface. Cover
the pot, place in the oven, and cook until the meat is very tender, 2 to 21⁄ 2
hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down into the meat
and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if
the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time. When the meat is done,
remove it from the pot, cover it loosely with foil to keep it warm, and set it
aside while you ﬁnish the sauce.
      5. Strain the braising liquid, reserving the vegetables. Pour the
strained liquid back into the Dutch oven. Skim the fat off the top and taste
the liquid. If it needs more ﬂavor, place the pot on the stove over medium-
high heat and simmer to reduce the liquid. For a thicker sauce, reduce it
until it coats the back of a spoon. Skim any scum off the top and season
with salt and pepper, then add the vegetables.
     6. Slice the brisket against the grain into thick slices. Place a few slices
on each plate, ladle some sauce and vegetables over the top, and serve.




                                                                        B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          73
THE CUT

Short ribs, which are the
                                  Black Pepper–Crusted
meaty ends of ribs, can
come from three different
                                  Wine-Braised Short Ribs with
places on the cow. The
ones from the chuck are           Garlic and Turnips
the most ﬂavorful, and
since we actually prefer a                S E RVE S 4

little more gnarl and fat in a
short rib, these are our          This is a very hearty dish, with the richly ﬂavored short ribs and all that garlic
favorites. For those of you
who like a somewhat
                                  and the root vegetables. But we love turnips, onions, and garlic, particularly in
leaner product, try the rib       the dead of winter. In fact, the ﬂavor of the broth is so seductive that we’ve
short rib. (Short ribs from       made this rather brothy, with more liquid than you might be used to in a dish
the plate, the third option,
tend to be a bit too gnarly
                                  of this type.
even for our taste.) Of                   Short ribs come either “English-style” or “ﬂanken-style.” English are cut
course, none of them is           parallel to the rib bone and between the ribs, so they look like a rectangle of
going to be really lean. But
they have a huge amount
                                  meat attached to a section of bone at the bottom. Flanken-style are cut
of deep, rich, beefy ﬂavor.       across the rib bones, so they look kind of like a xylophone, short lengths of rib
                                  surrounded by bone. Both work equally well, but we like English-style simply
OTHER NAMES                       because it is easier to separate the meat from the bone when you are ready
Barbecue ribs, braising
                                  to do so. They are also much easier to ﬁnd at the supermarket.
ribs.
                                          When you sear this pepper-encrusted meat, it’s going to create some
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE            very powerful smoke; you might want to temporarily disconnect the smoke
Flanken-style short ribs          detector, and make sure that your exhaust fan is turned to high.
also work well here,                      Serve this with a nice hunk of warm buttered bread and Mediterranean
although it’s more work to
get the meat off the bones.
                                  White Bean Salad (page 424) or a side of steamed Swiss chard with a little
                                  garlic. You could also make some grits to serve under the meat and sauce.
BUTCHERSPEAK
                                          4 to 5 pounds English-style beef short ribs, about 4 inches long
Most supermarkets (and
                                          1⁄ 2   cup freshly cracked black pepper, plus more to taste
many butcher shops too)
just label their short ribs as            Kosher salt to taste
such, with no further desig­
                                          3 tablespoons vegetable oil
nation. They are most likely
to be chuck short ribs.                   2 onions, peeled and diced small
Those will certainly do the               20 cloves garlic, peeled
job, but at a butcher shop                11 ⁄ 2 to 2 pounds turnips, peeled and diced large (you want about 3 cups)
you can ask for short ribs
                                          1 tomato, cored and diced small
from the rib section.
                                          2 cups dry red wine
                                          About 3 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                          1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley




74              H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

      2. Dry the short ribs with paper towels. Rub on all sides with the pep­
per and sprinkle with salt. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large oven­
proof pot with a lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but
not smoking. Add the ribs, in batches if necessary, and brown well on all
sides, 10 to 15 minutes total. As the ribs are browned, transfer them to a
platter.
       3. Pour off all but about 2 tablespoons of the fat from the pot.
Reduce the heat to medium, add the onions, and cook, stirring occasion­
ally, until lightly browned, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic and cook, stir­
ring frequently, for 2 minutes. Add the turnips and tomato and cook,
stirring, for an additional 2 minutes. Add the wine, bring to a simmer, and
simmer for 10 minutes, scraping up any brown stuff from the bottom of
the pan.
      4. Return the ribs to the pan and add enough stock to come halfway
up the sides of the ribs. Bring to a simmer and skim any scum from the top
of the liquid. Cover, place in the oven, and cook until very tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2
hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down into the meat
and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if
the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
      5. When the meat is done, remove the meat and turnips from the
pot, cover with foil, and set aside. Skim the fat and any scum from the
cooking liquid. Taste the liquid, and if it needs more ﬂavor, place the pot
on the stove over medium-high heat and simmer to reduce the liquid. Sea­
son with salt and pepper, stir in parsley, and serve the ribs and turnips hot
accompanied by the sauce.




                                                                        B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   75
THE CUT

See Black Pepper–Crusted
                                Orange-Braised Short Ribs with
Wine-Braised Short Ribs
(page 74) for more infor­
                                Fennel Seeds and Oregano
mation on short ribs and
how to choose them at                   S E RVE S 4

the butcher shop or super­
market.                         Short ribs are one of those cuts that has come into its own in American cook­
                                ing over the past decade or so. These little ribs require some cooking time, and
                                they have quite a bit of fat in and around them, but the ﬂavor that you get from
                                slow-cooking them with other intensely ﬂavored ingredients is unbeatable.
                                        Be sure to skim the fat from the braising liquid after cooking. Or, if you
                                really want to get rid of the fat, cook this dish a day ahead, cover, and refrig­
                                erate it, then remove the solidiﬁed fat from the top before you reheat it.
                                        We like to serve these short ribs with mashed potatoes or soft polenta
                                so we can use the braising liquid as a super-ﬂavorful gravy.

                                        4 to 5 pounds English-style beef short ribs, about 4 inches long
                                        6 tablespoon cracked fennel seeds
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        3 tablespoons vegetable oil
                                        2 medium red onions, peeled, halved, and very thinly sliced
                                        1 ⁄4   cup minced garlic
                                        1 to 2 teaspoons red pepper ﬂakes, or to taste
                                        1 cup dry red wine
                                        1 cup orange juice
                                        1⁄ 2   cup balsamic vinegar
                                        1⁄ 2   cup catsup
                                        2 tablespoons grainy mustard
                                        1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh oregano
                                        About 2 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)


                                        1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

                                      2. Dry the short ribs with paper towels, then rub on all sides with the
                                fennel seeds and salt and pepper, pressing gently so they adhere. In a 5­
                                inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot with a lid, heat the oil
                                over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the ribs, in batches
                                if necessary, and brown well, 10 to 15 minutes total; as the ribs are
                                browned, transfer them to a platter.
                                     3. Pour off all but about 2 tablespoons of fat from the pot. Add the
                                onions and cook, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.
                                Add the garlic and red pepper ﬂakes and cook, stirring frequently, for 2


76            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
more minutes. Add the wine, orange juice, balsamic vinegar, catsup, mus­
tard, and oregano and bring just to a simmer, scraping any browned bits
from the bottom of the pan.
      4. Add the meat along with salt and pepper to taste and enough stock
to bring the liquid halfway up the sides of the ribs. Bring to a simmer and
skim any scum from the top of the liquid. Cover, place in the oven, and
cook until very tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork
straight down into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides
out easily, the meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more
time.
      5. When the meat is done, remove it from the pot and cover it
loosely with foil. Skim the fat and any scum from the cooking liquid, then
taste the liquid, and if it needs more ﬂavor, place the pot on the stove over
medium-high heat and simmer to reduce the liquid. For a thicker sauce,
reduce it until it coats the back of a spoon. Season to taste with salt and
pepper and serve the ribs hot, accompanied by the sauce.




Puerto Rican Vinegar-Braised                                                              THE CUT

                                                                                         See Fennel-Crusted Flank

Flank Steak with Cabbage, Corn,                                                          Steak (page 114) for
                                                                                         details on ﬂank steak and
                                                                                         how to get what you want
and Yucca Salad                                                                          when buying it. Flank is
                                                                                         one of those rare
      S E RVE S 4                                                                        “both/and” cuts that can
                                                                                         be cooked very slowly, as it
                                                                                         is here, or very quickly, as it
If you think meat is too heavy for a hot summer day, give this recipe a try. You
                                                                                         is in the recipe on page 114,
see this kind of dish a lot in Latin America—a relatively tough cut of beef is           and be delicious both
braised in a vinegary stock, then shredded and used as part of a ﬂavorful dish           ways.
with lots of other components. That way, you get that terriﬁc combination of
                                                                                          OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
something that has been cooked for a very long time with something that has
                                                                                         Since you want to be able
not been cooked at all. To accentuate this contrast, we use some of the brais­
                                                                                         to shred this meat with
ing liquid in the salad dressing.                                                        your ﬁngers, the best sub­
      There is a really great mix of ﬂavors here—the richness of the beef and            stitute is pork butt.

its syrupy, cilantro-laced sauce; the bite of lime; the earthiness of cumin; the
heat of red pepper ﬂakes; and all the fresh vegetables in the salad—not to
mention the round starchiness of yucca, a bedrock Latin staple.
      This is delicious with Spicy Latin Black Beans (page 423) or just a plat­
ter of chilled sliced tropical fruit and Margaritas.



                                                                       B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T            77
                               FOR THE SPICE RUB

                               2 tablespoons minced garlic
                               2 tablespoons ground cumin
                               11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons kosher salt
                               1 tablespoon red pepper ﬂakes
                               11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
                               11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons dark brown sugar

                               11 ⁄ 2 to 2 pounds ﬂank steak, most of the external fat removed
                               3 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
                               2 onions, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced
                               2 stalks celery, diced medium
                               1 carrot, peeled and diced medium
                               2 bay leaves
                               3 whole cloves
                               1 cup red wine vinegar
                               Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                               FOR THE SALAD

                               1 medium yucca root (or substitute 2 medium potatoes)
                               3 ears corn, husked
                               1⁄ 2   small head white cabbage, cored and shredded
                               4 scallions (white and green parts), cut into thin strips
                               2 large red bell peppers, cored, seeded, and cut into thin strips
                               1 large carrot, peeled and cut into thin strips
                               1⁄ 2   cup extra virgin olive oil
                               1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
                               Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                               1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro (or substitute parsley)


                               1. Preheat the oven to 325°F.

                             2. In a small bowl, combine the spice rub ingredients and mix well.
                       Dry the ﬂank steak with paper towels, then rub it all over with this mix­
                       ture, pressing to make sure it adheres.
                             3. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot with a
                       lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.
                       Add the ﬂank steak and brown it well on both sides, 3 to 4 minutes per
                       side. Transfer the steak to a platter.
                            4. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
                       of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions, celery, and carrot and
                       cook, stirring occasionally, until the onions are golden brown, 11 to 13


78   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
minutes. Return the steak to the pot and add the bay leaves, cloves, vine­                COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

gar, and enough water so the liquid comes about halfway up the sides of                  Pile any leftover shredded
                                                                                         beef onto a tortilla, top it
the meat. Bring to a simmer, cover, and place in the oven. Braise until the
                                                                                         with some of the salad, roll
meat is tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight          it up, and you’ve got a great
down into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides out eas­             lunch to eat with an ice-
ily, the meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.              cold Mexican beer.

      5. Meanwhile, at some point while the meat is braising, cook the
corn and yucca: Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil over high heat.
Remove the brown skin and pink underlayer of ﬂesh from the yucca, then
cut the yucca lengthwise in half and remove the ﬁbrous center core. Cut
the ﬂesh into medium dice.
       6. Add the corn to the boiling water and cook just until you can smell
it, about 2 minutes. Remove from the water with tongs or a fork and rinse
under cold water to stop the cooking process. Add the yucca or potatoes
to the boiling water and cook until it is easily pierced with a fork but still
offers some resistance, about 20 minutes. Remove, rinse under cold water,
and drain. Cut the kernels from the corn. Set aside.
      7. When the meat is done, remove it from the pot. Strain the cooking
liquid into a saucepan, discarding the solids, and skim the fat from the sur­
face. Reserve 1⁄ 2 cup of the cooking liquid for the salad dressing, and gently
boil the rest over the heat until reduced to a syrupy sauce, about 10 min­
utes. Season with salt and pepper as needed.
      8. In a large bowl, combine the corn kernels, yucca, cabbage, scal­
lions, bell peppers, and carrot. Whisk the olive oil, lime juice, and salt and
pepper into the 1⁄ 2 cup reserved cooking liquid. Stir in the cilantro, pour the
dressing over the salad, and toss well to combine.
      9. Divide the salad among individual plates. Shred the warm ﬂank
steak with your ﬁngers and mix it with the sauce. Arrange the meat on top
of the salad and serve.




                                                                       B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          79
THE CUT

These bones may come
                                 Flintstones-Style BBQ Beef Ribs
from any of ribs 6 through
12. They have a fair amount
                                 with Hot, Sweet, and Sour Bone
of meat on them, but you
have to do some work to          Sauce
get it. For us, that makes it
all the more fun. You may                S E RVE S 4

see these bones on display
in some butcher stores and       This is a kind of a classic dish that I (Chris) used to eat a lot as a youngster in
supermarkets, but very
often you will have to ask
                                 big steak houses. Over time, the cooks in those places would accumulate a
for them. Butchers who sell      lot of the big bones that sit under the beef rib, because they would serve the
a lot of boneless rib roasts     rib meat boneless. So they’d have a lot of these very ﬂavorful bones left over,
are your best bet.
                                 and very often they would tend to put them out in an “all you can eat” situa­
                                 tion, because they didn’t really cost the restaurant anything.
                                         A lot of people boil these bones before they cook them, but I really like
                                 the idea of putting them in the oven and cooking them for a long time at a low
                                 temperature, since I think that gives them much better ﬂavor.
                                         This is not a dish for people who want tender meat; it’s for those who
                                 enjoy good beef ﬂavor and the primitive tactile experience of gnawing on
                                 bones. To me, the ﬂavor and textural rewards are deﬁnitely worth it. It’s a
                                 pretty messy situation, though, so you’ll need to have a good supply of paper
                                 towels and beer on hand. In fact, it’s probably best to eat this with good
                                 friends so you can get as messy as you want without worrying about it.
                                         Watermelon and corn bread are the proper accompaniments here.

                                         FOR THE RUB
                                         1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper
                                         2 tablespoons brown sugar
                                         2 tablespoons paprika
                                         2 tablespoons ground cumin
                                         2 tablespoons kosher salt

                                         5 pounds beef back ribs (about 2 racks)

                                         F OR TH E SAU CE
                                         1⁄ 3   cup molasses
                                         1 cup catsup
                                         1 ⁄4   cup balsamic vinegar
                                         1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
                                         1⁄ 2   cup orange juice
                                         1 ⁄4   cup soy sauce
                                         2 tablespoons lightly packed brown sugar
                                         3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger



80             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
         3 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice
         1⁄ 2   cup thinly sliced scallions (white and green parts)
         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


         1. Preheat the oven to 200°F.

      2. In a small bowl, combine the rub ingredients and mix well. Rub
the ribs all over with this mixture, pressing lightly to make sure it adheres,
and lay them on a foil-lined baking sheet. Place in the oven and cook for 5
hours.
         3.     About 40 minutes before the bones are done, light a ﬁre in your
grill.
     4. While the ribs are roasting, combine the sauce ingredients in a
medium saucepan and simmer over low heat for 15 minutes, or until the
sauce is slightly thickened. Remove it from the heat and cover to keep
warm.
      5. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are covered with white
ash, cut the ribs into individual ribs and place on the grill. Grill for 5 to 7
minutes per side, or until the rub develops a crusty appearance. Brush the
ribs with sauce and cook for 1 minute more, until the sauce forms a glaze.
Remove the ribs from the ﬁre and serve with the remaining sauce.




                                                                       B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   81
THE CUT

Steaks cut from the round
                                  Sweet-and-Sour Braised Bottom
are really too tough for
grilling, broiling, panfrying,
                                  Round Steak with Eggplant and
or even for roasting. They
do respond well, though, to       Ginger
long, slow moist cooking
methods such as braising.                 S E RVE S 6 TO 8

This dish makes good use
of the bottom round steak,        There are a lot of ﬂavors going on in this Asian-style dish, with the rather large
which is better for this par­
ticular application than a
                                  doses of cardamom and white pepper adding particularly exotic overtones.
roast because it is not as        We think the many strong ﬂavors all work very well together, creating a dish
thick. This is deﬁnitely a        with plenty of layers of ﬂavor. And then of course there is the eggplant, which
supermarket cut.
                                  kind of melts down over the long, slow cooking to create a wonderfully moist,

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                  meaty, thick sauce.
You can substitute any top                Serve this with white or brown rice and some steamed greens on the
round steak or chuck steak        side.
here, as well as the tri-tip
roast.                                    One 4-pound bottom round steak, about 2 inches thick
                                          1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked white pepper
                                          3 tablespoons roughly ground cardamom seeds
                                          Kosher salt to taste
                                          3 tablespoons vegetable oil, or more if needed
                                          2 onions, peeled and diced medium
                                          1 ⁄4   cup minced garlic
                                          1 ⁄4   cup minced fresh ginger
                                          1 to 2 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice
                                          2 medium eggplants, diced medium
                                          1 ⁄4   cup tomato paste
                                          2 cups dry white wine
                                          About 2 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                          6 tablespoons soy sauce
                                          1⁄ 2   cup rice wine vinegar (or substitute white wine vinegar)
                                          1 ⁄4   cup packed dark brown sugar
                                          Freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                          1 bunch scallions (white and green parts), very thinly sliced
                                          1 ⁄4   cup Asian sesame oil
                                          1 ⁄4   cup sesame seeds, toasted in a dry skillet over medium heat, shaken
                                                 frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes
                                          4 dashes Tabasco




82              H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

      2. Dry the steak with paper towels, then rub it on all sides with the
pepper, cardamom, and salt, pressing gently to be sure they adhere. In a 5­
inch-deep Dutch oven or other large, ovenproof pot with a lid, heat the oil
over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the steak and
brown well, 10 to 12 minutes per side. Remove and set aside.
      3. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions and cook, stirring fre­
quently, until lightly browned, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic, ginger, and
chiles and cook, stirring, for 2 minutes. Add the eggplant and tomato paste
and cook, stirring frequently, for 4 more minutes. Add the wine, stock, soy
sauce, vinegar, and brown sugar and bring just to a boil, scraping up any
browned bits from the bottom of the pot.
      4. Add the steak and bring just to a simmer. Skim any scum from the
surface of the liquid and season to taste with salt and pepper. At this point
the liquid should cover the steak about halfway; if it does not, add more
stock. Cover, place in the oven, and cook until fork-tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours.
To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down into the meat and try
to pull the fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if the
meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
       5. When the meat is done, transfer it to a plate, cover it loosely with
foil, and let it rest for about 10 minutes. Skim the fat from the surface of
the cooking liquid and season with salt and pepper, then place on the stove
over high heat and reduce until slightly thickened.
      6. Meanwhile, in a small bowl, combine the scallions, sesame oil,
toasted sesame seeds, and Tabasco and mix well.
    7. Cut the meat into thick slices and serve, topping each serving with
some of the sauce and scallion mixture.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   83
                                RECIPES FOR
                                SMALL TENDER CUTS OF BEEF

10 STEPS TO GREAT GRILLED       Pan-Seared Delmonico with Roasted Figs and Sherry-Parsley
BEEF
                                Sauce
 1. Build a two-level ﬁre
    using hardwood              Broiled Bacon-Wrapped Filet Mignon with Roasted Endive and
    charcoal.                   Mushrooms and Blue Cheese Butter
 2. Wait for the ﬂames to
    die down and the coals      Mr. Perfect Steak for Two
    to be covered with
    gray ash.                   Black Pan-Seared Tournedos with Asparagus, Crab, and A-1
                                Hollandaise
 3. Check the temperature
    of the ﬁre.
                                White Pepper–Crusted Black-and-Blue Steak Stuffed with
 4. Dry the meat well.          Spicy Sesame Spinach with Soy-Wasabi Dipping Sauce

 5. Season the meat well.
                                Pan-Seared Thin Strip Loin Steak in the Style of Diane
 6. Sear the meat hard
    over a hot ﬁre.             Pepper-Crusted Grilled Strip Loin Steak with Homemade
                                Steak Sauce and Mushroom Hobo Packs
 7. Move the meat to the
    cooler part of the ﬁre if
                                Grilled Sirloin Steak High Plains Drifter–Style
    it needs to cook more
    slowly (don’t use the
    cover).                     Stir-fried Sirloin Tips with Ginger, Peanuts, and Scallions over
                                Smoky Sesame Cabbage
 8. Flip the meat only once
    during cooking.
                                Laotian-Style Aromatic Beef Salad
 9. Check for doneness
    early and often (nick,      Grilled Polynesian-Style Tenderloin Tip Kebabs with Bacon,
    peek, and cheat).           Pineapple, and Peppers

10. Remove the meat from
                                Herb-Crusted Grilled Top Round Steak “London Broil–Style”
    the ﬁre, cover with foil
    and allow to rest, then     with Maître d’Hôtel Butter and Smoky Balsamic Onions
    serve it up.
                                Seared Balsamic-Glazed Top Blade Chuck Steaks with
                                Spinach, Lemon, and Olive Oil




84
   Southeast Asian–Style Grilled Skirt Steak with Aromatic    10 STEPS TO GREAT SAUTÉED
                                                              BEEF
                         Greens and Ginger-Lime Dressing
                                                               1. Use a big heavy
Lime-Soaked, Cumin-Crusted Grilled Skirt Steak with Green         sauté pan.
                                        Olive–Chile Relish
                                                               2. Dry the meat well.

                 Sliced Grilled Skirt Steak on Greek Salad     3. Season the meat well.

                                                               4. Use only a small
Fennel-Crusted Flank Steak with Orange–Black Olive Relish
                                                                  amount of oil.
                                     and Spicy Mint Honey
                                                               5. Get the pan and the
   Korean-Style Grilled Short Ribs with Ginger, Chiles, and       oil hot.
                                            Quick Kimchee      6. Don’t overcrowd the
                                                                  meat in the pan.

                                                               7. Sear the meat hard.

                                                               8. Flip the meat only once
                                                                  while cooking.

                                                               9. Check for doneness
                                                                  early and often (nick,
                                                                  peek, and cheat).

                                                              10. Remove the meat from
                                                                  the heat, cover loosely
                                                                  with foil, and allow to
                                                                  rest, then serve.

                                                              10 STEPS TO GREAT BROILED
                                                              BEEF

                                                                 Check out sautéing:
                                                                 The steps are the same
                                                                 except you use a broiler
                                                                 pan instead of a sauté
                                                                 pan, preheat the broiler
                                                                 instead of getting the
                                                                 oil hot, and skip the
                                                                 searing step.




                                                                                           85
THE CUT

Delmonico is another name
                                 Pan-Seared Delmonico with
for a boneless rib-eye
steak. Not surprisingly, this
                                 Roasted Figs and Sherry-Parsley
steak comes from the rib
section of the cow, the          Sauce
same part of the beast that
we know as the prime rib                 S E RVE S 4

when it is used as a roast
rather than sliced into          With the rich taste of ﬁgs and the subtle tang of sherry, this dish has some
steaks. This steak differs
from steaks from the short
                                 classic Spanish ﬂavors going for it. To provide a little exotica, we throw in
loin (e.g., ﬁlet mignon, strip   some coriander seeds, which go very well with the ﬁgs. But center stage is
steak, porterhouse, and          ably occupied by the Delmonico, also known as the rib-eye steak. This steak
T-bone) because it has
more streaks of fat in and
                                 not only is quite tender, but also has very rich beef ﬂavor. It is the favorite
around it. This gives it a       steak of many a devoted carnivore, and in our steak pantheon it comes in
truly deep, beefy ﬂavor.         second only to the T-bone and porterhouse.
                                         As with most steaks, we like this best served with potatoes and a green
OTHER NAMES
                                 salad. Outstanding choices would include Au Gratin Potatoes (page 410),
Rib-eye steak, Spencer
steak, beauty steak.             Hash Browns (page 412), or plain baked potatoes and a leaf lettuce salad
                                 with a simple sherry vinaigrette.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                   This dish is also fantastic when grilled. Cook the steak over a hot ﬁre for
Top loin strip steak, ﬁlet       about the same amount of time as indicated here. Grill the ﬁgs around the
mignon, or a good sirloin
steak would all work ﬁne
                                 edge of the ﬁre, where it is cooler, until they are browned on all sides, about
here. If you increase the        3 minutes.
cooking time just a bit,
porterhouse and T-bone                   FOR THE FIGS

would also be great with                 8 fresh ﬁgs, halved
this preparation.
                                         1 tablespoon olive oil
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                         F OR TH E SAU CE
                                         1⁄ 3   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                         1 tablespoon dry sherry
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         1⁄ 2   small red onion, peeled and diced small
                                         1 teaspoon minced garlic
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                         Four 12- to 14-ounce Delmonico steaks, 1 to 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         1 ⁄4   cup cracked coriander seeds (or 2 tablespoons ground coriander)
                                         3 tablespoons olive oil




86             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1. Preheat the oven to 400°F.                                                     BUTCHERSPEAK

                                                                                      The Delmonico is one of
      2. Rub the ﬁg halves with the olive oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper          those cuts that is confus­
to taste, and place cut side up on a baking sheet. Roast until they are ten­          ing because some people
der but not mushy, about 20 minutes. Remove and set aside.                            also apply this name to a
                                                                                      strip loin steak. To be sure
     3. While the ﬁgs are roasting, make the sauce: In a medium bowl,                 that you get what you are
                                                                                      looking for here, ask for a
whisk together all the ingredients until well combined.
                                                                                      boneless rib-eye steak.
      4. Dry the steaks with paper towels, sprinkle them generously with              That will also ensure that
                                                                                      you get a steak that is cut
salt and pepper, and rub them all over with the coriander, pressing gently
                                                                                      from the large end of the
to be sure it adheres. In a large sauté pan (or two sauté pans to avoid               beef rib (ribs 6 through 8)
crowding), heat the olive oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not            rather than the small end
smoking. Add the steaks and cook until well seared on one side, 5 to 7                (ribs 9 through 12). Techni­
                                                                                      cally, those smaller steaks
minutes. Turn and continue cooking for another 4 to 7 minutes for rare.
                                                                                      are called rib steaks rather
To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the              than rib-eye steaks, and
thickest part of the meat and take a peek; it should be slightly less done            they don’t have quite as
than you like it. When the steaks are done to your liking, remove them                deep a beefy ﬂavor as the
                                                                                      Delmonico.
from the heat, cover them loosely with foil, and let them rest for 5 min­
utes.
      5. Place a steak on each plate, along with 4 ﬁg halves. Drizzle the
steak and the ﬁgs lightly with the sauce and serve, passing the remaining
sauce separately.




                                                                    B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T         87
THE CUT

Filet mignon is a steak cut
                                   Broiled Bacon-Wrapped Filet
from the center of the ten­
derloin. The tenderloin sits
                                   Mignon with Roasted Endive and
on top of the cow’s back
and does none of the work          Mushrooms and Blue Cheese
of moving the animal
around, so it has virtually        Butter
none of the connective tis­
sues and sinews that make                 S E RVE S 4
meat tough. It is also sur­
rounded by fat, which con­
                                   Here it is, the “ne plus ultra” steak of our youth, the one that our parents
tributes to its butter-soft
texture. If tenderness is          ordered when they wanted to really put on the dog. The ﬁlet mignon is basi­
your Holy Grail, this is your      cally a thick piece of meat cut from the center of the absolutely most tender
steak.
                                   muscle on the cow. It is quite lean and has a very mild beef ﬂavor. Because of
                                   this, ﬁlet mignon is often wrapped in bacon or served with a ﬂavored butter to
OTHER NAMES

Tenderloin steak, ﬁlet de
                                   give it a little extra oomph in both the fat and ﬂavor departments. Here we opt
boeuf, tender steak, ﬁllet         for both choices, creating an old school–type of dish like those that were the
steak.                             top of the line at the steak houses in our childhood.
                                          We also roast some endive and mushrooms to go alongside the steak.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                   The endive adds a nice edge of bitterness that contrasts nicely with the super­
The only other cut that
has the super-tender tex­          rich, almost unctuous quality of the bacon-wrapped, butter-topped meat.
ture of the ﬁlet mignon is
                                          FOR THE BUTTER
the tournedos, which is a
steak cut from the small                  8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter, at room temperature
end of the tenderloin rather              4 ounces blue cheese
than the center, as the ﬁlet
mignon is.                                F O R T H E V E G E TA B L E S

                                          2 heads Belgian endive, halved
BUTCHERSPEAK                              20 medium white mushrooms, stemmed
You can often ﬁnd this cut
                                          3 tablespoons olive oil
in the supermarket, but you
are probably better off                   1 tablespoon minced garlic
going to a butcher for it.                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
After all, this is the most               1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley or oregano
expensive piece of beef                   1 ⁄4   cup balsamic vinegar
you can buy, and you want
to be absolutely sure to get
top quality when you are                  Four 8- to 10-ounce ﬁlet mignons, about 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick
laying out that kind of                   3 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
money. You can also try to                Kosher salt to taste
get the butcher to give you
                                          4 slices thick-cut bacon
this cut bone-in. It’s a rarity,
but it is a truly super cut,
because the bone gives it                 1. Preheat the oven to 450°F.
some added ﬂavor to go
with the tenderness.                    2. Make the butter: In a medium bowl, combine the butter and blue
                                   cheese and mix well. Place the ﬂavored butter on a piece of waxed paper


88              H OW T O C O O K M E AT
or plastic wrap, form it into a rough cylinder, and wrap it up. Refrigerate                 COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

until ﬁrm.                                                                                 If you have any leftovers,
                                                                                           chop them all together
      3. In a large bowl, toss the endive and mushrooms with the olive oil,                for a luxurious endive-
garlic, and salt and pepper to coat thoroughly. Place the vegetables on a                  mushroom-steak hash,
                                                                                           then top it with a bit of the
baking sheet and roast until the endive is slightly browned on the outside
                                                                                           blue cheese butter.
and the mushrooms look moist all the way through, about 20 to 25 min­
utes. When the vegetables are done, toss them in a large bowl with the
herbs and balsamic vinegar. Cover with aluminum foil to keep them warm
while you broil the steaks.
      4. Preheat the broiler.

      5. Dry the ﬁlet mignons with paper towels and sprinkle them gener­
ously with the pepper and salt. Wrap a strip of bacon around each one,
securing it with a toothpick. Put them on the broiling rack, place 3 inches
from the heat source, and sear well on one side, 3 to 4 minutes. Turn and
continue cooking to the desired doneness, 3 to 6 minutes more for rare. To
check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thick­
est part of the meat and take a peek; it should be slightly less done than
you like it. When the steaks are done to your liking, remove them from
the heat, cover loosely with foil, and let rest for 5 minutes.
       6. Slice the butter into 1 ⁄4-inch-thick slices. Divide the roasted vegeta­
bles among four plates, top each with a bacon-wrapped steak, and let a
slice or two of the blue cheese butter melt on top.




Mr. Perfect Steak for Two
      S E RVE S 2



Meat is my (Chris’s) favorite food, beef is my favorite meat, steak is my
favorite beef, and T-bone or porterhouse is my favorite steak. In other words,
this is the best meat in the world. In fact, I love this steak so much that when
our group of friends goes on its annual pilgrimage to Costa Rica, I always
take some humongous versions of these steaks along in my luggage for our
ﬁrst dinner on the beach.
      Whichever of these two spectacular steaks you choose, it’s important
that it be at least 2 inches thick. That way, you can get a deep, crusty sear on
the outside without overcooking the inside. To accomplish that, we use the
“sear and move” technique, where we start out cooking the meat hard over a
hot ﬁre, then move it to a lower ﬁre to ﬁnish cooking. It’s crucial that you


                                                                         B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T           89
THE CUT                          check this cut for doneness often too, because its thickness makes it hard to
This cut, which comes from       judge. If you want, you could even use a meat thermometer on this one.
the short loin section of the
                                         Since there are only four ingredients in this recipe (and since you’re
cow, has a large bone run­
ning down it and is actually     already going to be paying top dollar for the steak), you should use the best
two steaks in one. It            of each. Make sure you use coarse salt, crack the pepper just before it goes
includes a section of the
                                 on the steak for the fullest ﬂavor, and get some high-quality extra virgin olive
ultratender tenderloin on
one side of the bone and a       oil for rubbing.
section of the very tender               Serve this with New Potato Hobo Packs (page 442) or a baked sweet
top loin on the other side.
                                 potato with maple sour cream and a nice spinach salad or some steamed
And, of course, you also
get the bone to chew on,         spinach with garlic.
which is no mean bonus.
     The difference between              One giant 2- to 21 ⁄ 2-inch-thick steak, either a 21 ⁄ 2-pound T-bone or a
the two bone-in steaks                     porterhouse
from this part of the cow is             1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
the size of the tenderloin
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
portion. The porterhouse
comes from the rear sec­
tion of the short loin where             1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.
the tenderloin muscle is
thicker, so it includes a             2. Pat the steak dry with paper towels, then rub it with the oil and
section of the tenderloin        sprinkle it generously with salt and pepper.
that is at least 11 ⁄4 inches
across, sometimes as                   3. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are covered with white
much as 2 inches or even         ash, check the temperature of the ﬁre: you want a hot ﬁre here (you can
more. The T-bone, cut from
                                 hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds). Place
the center section of the
loin, includes a smaller         the steak over the hottest part of the ﬁre and cook until well seared on one
piece of tenderloin, from        side, 6 to 8 minutes. Turn and sear the second side, again for 6 to 8 min­
1 ⁄ 2 to 11 ⁄4 inches across.
                                 utes. Move to a medium-hot part of the grill and cook, turning once, 10 to
                                 15 minutes more for rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat:
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                 Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat and take a peek; it
You can substitute a bone­
                                 should be slightly less done than you like it.
less or bone-in rib-eye
steak here.                             4. Remove the meat from the ﬁre, cover it loosely with foil, and allow
                                 it to rest for 10 minutes before serving.
BUTCHERSPEAK

You are probably not going
to ﬁnd a steak this thick in
the supermarket. In fact,
you may even have to call a
butcher ahead of time to
get it. Tell him you want a
21 ⁄ 2-pound T-bone or
porterhouse that’s 2 inches
thick or more, no skimping.
He’ll know you’re a real
steak fanatic.




90             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Black Pan-Seared Tournedos with                                                               THE CUT

                                                                                             The tournedos is pretty

Asparagus, Crab, and A-1                                                                     much the same as a ﬁlet
                                                                                             mignon. Both are cut from

Hollandaise                                                                                  the tenderloin. This muscle,
                                                                                             which runs along the top of
                                                                                             the spine, is the least used
      S E RVE S 4                                                                            muscle on the cow and
                                                                                             therefore the most tender,
This is a knock-off of the famous dish called Veal Oscar, which was the toast of             a piece of meat so buttery
                                                                                             that it can be cut with a
hotel restaurants in the early part of this century. The combination of crab and             fork. A tournedos is cut on
asparagus is a classic, one of those pairs of foods that somehow just seem to                the bias from the small end
perfectly complement each other. They’re also a nice match for the subtle, del­              of the tenderloin, while a
                                                                                             ﬁlet mignon is cut from the
icate ﬂavor of the tournedos. This is an expensive dish, fun for a fancy dinner              center of the muscle. You
with friends, with a dash or two of A-1 sauce to cut the pretense a bit.                     might ﬁnd this cut in an
      Speaking of which, don’t be scared off by the hollandaise sauce. You                   upscale supermarket, but
                                                                                             chances are you’ll need to
know what happens if the worst disaster occurs and it breaks? Nothing. It                    get it from a butcher. Since
still tastes the same, it just doesn’t look as good. So, especially if you are               you want the meat to get
cooking this for friends, don’t give it a thought. Chances are it won’t break                nicely seared in this recipe,
                                                                                             it is important that your
anyway, particularly if you use a blender to make it. If you are in a hurry,                 tournedos actually be a full
though, you can make a compound butter in place of the hollandaise. Just let                 2 inches thick.
the butter come to room temperature, then combine it with all the hollandaise
ingredients except the eggs and water and mix well.                                           OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

                                                                                             Filet mignon is an ideal
      Serve this with an arugula and blue cheese salad and crispy Roasted
                                                                                             substitute here, and you
Potatoes (page 414) or French Fries (page 411).                                              can also use boneless rib-
                                                                                             eye steak (Delmonico) or a
      FOR TH E HOLLAN DAI S E
                                                                                             boneless strip loin.
      1⁄ 2   pound (2 sticks) unsalted butter
      2 tablespoons warm water
      3 large egg yolks
      2 tablespoons fresh lime juice (about 1 lime)
      3 tablespoons A-1 sauce
      3 to 6 dashes Tabasco sauce
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
      Four 8-ounce tournedos, about 2 inches thick
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      32 small stalks asparagus, trimmed, blanched in boiling water for
         2 minutes, until crisp-tender, cooled in ice water, and drained
      8 ounces fresh crabmeat, picked over for shells and cartilage
      1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice




                                                                           B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          91
                               1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

                            2. Make the hollandaise: In a small saucepan, melt the butter over
                       low heat.
                             Blender method: Place all the other ingredients in a blender, cover, and
                       turn it on, then drizzle in the butter through the hole in the cover. The
                       sauce will thicken. Taste and adjust the seasoning. Cover and keep in a
                       warm place until ready to serve.
                             Hand method: Combine the egg yolks and water in the top of a dou­
                       ble boiler and whisk until light and frothy. Place the top of the double
                       boiler over barely simmering water and continue to whisk the egg mixture
                       in a ﬁgure-eight motion until it starts to thicken, 4 to 8 minutes. When it
                       starts to thicken, you will begin to see a ﬁgure eight on the bottom of the
                       pan as you whisk. Remove the pan from the water and continue to whisk
                       for about 15 seconds to prevent the eggs from getting too hot and cur­
                       dling. Very gradually add the melted butter to the egg yolks, whisking con­
                       stantly; if the sauce gets too thick at this point, add just a little water.
                       When the butter is fully incorporated, whisk in the lime juice, A-1 sauce,
                       Tabasco, parsley, and salt and pepper. Cover and keep in a warm place
                       until ready to serve.
                             3. In a large cast-iron skillet or ovenproof sauté pan, heat 2 table­
                       spoons of the olive oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not
                       smoking. Pat the steaks dry with paper towels, sprinkle generously with
                       salt and pepper, and add to the pan. Sear well on one side, 5 to 6 minutes,
                       then turn and sear well on the other side, 3 to 4 minutes. Place the pan in
                       the oven and cook for 4 to 6 minutes more for rare. To check for doneness,
                       nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it
                       should be slightly less done than you like it. Remove the steaks from the
                       oven, cover loosely with foil, and allow to rest for 5 minutes.
                             4. Meanwhile, heat a large sauté pan over medium-high heat. Add
                       the remaining 2 tablespoons olive oil and heat until very hot but not smok­
                       ing. Add the asparagus and cook, rolling it over a couple of times to cook
                       evenly, until nicely seared, about 2 minutes. Sprinkle with salt and pepper,
                       remove from the pan, and set aside. Add the crabmeat to the pan and
                       sauté, stirring, until just warmed through, 30 to 45 seconds. Remove from
                       the heat and season with the lemon juice and salt and pepper.
                             5. Top each tournedos with 8 asparagus spears and several table­
                       spoons of crab, drizzle generously with the hollandaise, and serve right
                       away.




92   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
White Pepper–Crusted Black-and-                                                                  THE CUT

                                                                                                This is the wildly popular

Blue Steak Stuffed with Spicy                                                                   top loin strip steak, cut
                                                                                                double thick. You’ll deﬁ­

Sesame Spinach with Soy-Wasabi                                                                  nitely have to go to a
                                                                                                butcher to get a piece of
                                                                                                meat this thick, but you
Dipping Sauce                                                                                   need that thickness to get
                                                                                                the raw-inside/seared­
      S E RVE S 8 TO 10 AS AN APPETI Z E R                                                      outside quality we’re look­
                                                                                                ing for. See Pepper-
                                                                                                Crusted Grilled Strip Loin
Here we take a double-thick boneless top loin steak, rub it with aromatic
                                                                                                Steak (page 96) for more
white pepper, and sear it very hard over a hot ﬁre so that it gets a good crust                 on this cut.
on the outside but remains pretty much raw in the middle. Then we slice it
paper-thin, so it is almost like seared carpaccio, if that’s not a contradiction in              OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

terms. After that, we wrap it up around some spicy, sesame-ﬂavored spinach                      The ﬁrm but ﬁne-grained
                                                                                                texture of the top loin strip
to make a very ﬂavorful appetizer, which we serve with a simple two-ingredient                  is a key to this dish, so it’s
dipping sauce.                                                                                  best to stick to that cut.
      This may sound like a fair amount of work, but it’s really pretty easy. Try
serving this as an appetizer in front of a light ﬁsh meal.

      One 2-pound boneless strip loin steak, 21 ⁄ 2 to 31 ⁄ 2 inches thick, fat trimmed
        totally
      1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked white pepper
      Kosher salt to taste

      FOR TH E S PI NACH

      1 pound fresh spinach, trimmed and well washed
      2 tablespoons Asian sesame oil
      10 dashes Tabasco sauce
      1 teaspoon sugar

      F OR TH E D I PPI N G SAU CE
      1⁄ 2   cup soy sauce
      2 tablespoons wasabi powder (available in Asian markets), mixed with
         water to the consistency of wet sand
      4 ounces pickled ginger (available in Asian markets)


      1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

      2. Pat the steak dry with paper towels, then rub it all over with the
white pepper and salt. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are very
hot, check the temperature: you are looking for a hot ﬁre here (you can
hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1 second). Place the
steak on the grill and sear well on the top and bottom and two long sides,



                                                                              B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T            93
                                  about 4 minutes on each. Remove the steak from the heat and allow to rest
                                  while you prepare the spinach.
                                        3. Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil, and ﬁll your sink or a
                                  large bowl with ice and water. Blanch the spinach in the boiling water for
                                  1 minute; do not overcook, or the spinach will lose its bright color and
                                  fresh taste. Drain and immediately plunge into the ice water to stop the
                                  cooking process, then drain again and squeeze dry by the handful. (Be
                                  sure to wring the spinach dry at this point; if you leave it too moist, the
                                  ﬁnal dish may have a soggy texture.)
                                        4. In a small bowl, combine the oil, Tabasco sauce, and sugar and mix
                                  well. Add the spinach and toss, so the spinach is coated with the dressing.
                                       5. Make the dipping sauce: Combine the soy sauce and wasabi and
                                  mix well.
                                        6. Slice the steak very thin on the bias, against the grain. Place a piece
                                  of pickled ginger and a little bit of the spinach mixture on each slice of
                                  steak, then roll up tightly and pin together with a toothpick. Serve with
                                  the dipping sauce.




THE CUT

This is a relatively thin slab
                                  Pan-Seared Thin Strip Loin Steak
of meat cut from the top
loin muscle (also known as
                                  in the Style of Diane
the shell), which along with
the tenderloin makes up                   S E RVE S 4

the short loin section of the
cow. Although we usually          If you’re having some friends over and you want to give them a bit of a show,
recommend that you get
                                  try this dish. It is really a trip back in time to the days of tuxedo-clad waiters
steaks that are at least 11 ⁄ 2
inches thick, for this table-     who fooled around with the food at your table in order to make you feel
side prep, a thinner steak        important. But it is also a very tasty and impressive dish. Basically we’re tak­
is better. And since we’re
                                  ing a boneless steak, coating it with a bit of mustard, cooking it up, and then
using a thinner piece of
steak here, you should be         making a quick brandy pan sauce. For all its impressive aura, it’s quite easy.
able to get it in your super­     Just be sure that you take the pan away from the heat for 20 seconds before
market.
                                  igniting the brandy; otherwise, you may get a big whoof of ﬂame.
                                          Good-quality mustard is a key to success with this dish, so don’t skimp.
                                  Serve this with roast or baked potatoes and a classy green vegetable such
                                  as Roasted Asparagus (page 427) or Brussels Sprouts in Brown Butter
                                  (page 428).




94              H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     Four 8-ounce strip loin steaks, about 1 ⁄ 2 to 3 ⁄4 inch thick, well trimmed                 OTHER NAMES

     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                                       See Pepper-Crusted
     1 ⁄4                                                                                        Grilled Strip Loin Steak
            cup grainy mustard
                                                                                                 (page 96).
     3 tablespoons olive oil, divided

     F OR TH E SAU CE                                                                             OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

     1 ⁄4   cup ﬁnely diced shallots (or substitute red onion)                                   You can substitute any of
     1⁄ 3
                                                                                                 the other very tender
            cup brandy (or dry Madeira)
                                                                                                 steaks here, such as the
     1⁄ 2   cup beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)                                       ﬁlet mignon or rib-eye.
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh parsley
     2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 lemon)


      1. Dry the steaks with paper towels and sprinkle generously with salt
and pepper. In a shallow bowl, combine the mustard and 2 tablespoons of
the oil and mix well. Add the steaks and toss them about so they get thor­
oughly coated.
      2. In a large sauté pan, heat the remaining tablespoon of oil over
medium-high heat until very hot but not quite smoking. Add the steaks
(use two pans if necessary to avoid crowding) and cook until well seared
on one side, 3 to 4 minutes. Turn and continue cooking for a total of 4 to
6 minutes for rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4­
inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less done
than you like it. Remove the steaks from the pan and cover them loosely
with aluminum foil to keep warm.
      3. Make the sauce: Add the shallots to the pan and stir over medium-
high heat for about 15 seconds. Take the pan completely away from the
stove (unless you want singed eyebrows) and add the brandy. Wait for 20
seconds, then return the pan to the heat and ignite the brandy with a
match, being careful that you are not leaning over the pan. When the
ﬂame dies, add the stock and bring to a simmer, scraping the bottom of
the pan to dissolve the ﬂavorful brown crusty stuff. Allow the sauce to sim­
mer vigorously until it is reduced enough to coat the back of a spoon,
about 5 to 7 minutes. Season the sauce with salt and pepper and add the
parsley and lemon juice.
     4. Serve the steaks with the sauce on the side.




                                                                               B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T           95
THE CUT

This steak comes from one
                                 Pepper-Crusted Grilled Strip Loin
of the two muscles in the
very tender (and pricey)
                                 Steak with Homemade Steak
short loin section of the
cow. After the tenderloin is     Sauce and Mushroom Hobo Packs
removed, the remaining
short loin muscle, also                  S E RVE S 4 TO 6

known as the shell, is cut
into strip steaks. They are      The strip loin is right up there with our favorites in the steak department. I
really a great steak: tender
and ﬁne-grained, but with
                                 (Chris) have one about twice a week at Frank’s Steak House in Cambridge,
good ﬂavor too.                  Massachusetts. I’m not alone in my enthusiasm, either; this steak is so popu­
                                 lar that it has accumulated over a dozen vernacular names, from New York
OTHER NAMES                      strip to country club steak to ambassador steak. Whatever you call it, it
For boneless: ambassador
                                 comes from the top loin muscle, so it is extremely tender and has some good,
steak, hotel-style steak,
boneless club steak, New         strong beefy ﬂavor to boot.
York strip, Texas strip,                 The mushroom hobo packs that go with it are quick to put together, but
Kansas City strip; for bone-
                                 they have enough earthy ﬂavor to stand up to this awesome steak. Exotic
in: club steak, country club
steak, shell steak, sirloin      (read expensive) mushrooms are wonderful with the steak, but button mush­
strip steak, strip steak,        rooms are great cooked this way too.
New York steak.
                                         It’s fun to ﬁgure out how to make something that you have always
                                 bought in a bottle at the store, like catsup and mustard, so here’s our home­
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Any tender steak would be
                                 made version of super-ﬂavorful steak sauce to go with the excellent steak.
a good substitute here, but      You can keep the leftover sauce, tightly covered and refrigerated, for up to a
the Delmonico (rib-eye)          month. Of course, if you’re in a rush, you can always buy yourself a bottle of
would be our top choice.
                                 steak sauce at the market instead of making it yourself.
BUTCHERSPEAK                             F OR TH E SAU CE
You can ﬁnd these steaks                 2 tablespoons olive oil
at most supermarkets, but
                                         1 medium onion, peeled and thinly sliced
the key is to get a steak
that is small enough to be               1 cup shrimp shells, 1 teaspoon chopped anchovies, or 1 teaspoon
a serving size for one but                  chopped sardines (optional)
thick enough to get that                 1 tablespoon minced garlic
great sear on the outside                1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger
without overcooking on the
                                         1 tablespoon minced fresh chile peppers of your choice
inside. This means getting
steaks from the part of the              1 cup white vinegar
short loin closer to the rib,            1 cup beer of your choice
rather than the part closer
                                         1 cup pineapple juice
to the sirloin. To be sure of
                                         1⁄ 2   cup molasses
this, you may want to go to
a butcher.                               3 tablespoons tomato paste
                                         5 whole cloves
                                         1 tablespoon ground cumin
                                         2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper




96             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1 shot bourbon (optional)
     1 ⁄4   cup soy sauce
     1 lime, very thinly sliced

     F O R T H E H O B O PA C K S

     2 pounds mushrooms (any kind), trimmed
     1⁄ 3   cup extra virgin olive oil
     2 tablespoons minced garlic
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh herbs: any one or a combination of sage,
            thyme, and/or oregano
     2 tablespoons dry sherry
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

     Four 12- to 16-ounce strip loin steaks, about 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick
     1 cup freshly cracked black pepper
     Kosher salt to taste


      1. Make the sauce: In a large saucepan, heat the oil over medium-
high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and cook, stirring
occasionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the shrimp shells
(or anchovies or sardines) if using them, along with the garlic, ginger, and
chiles. Cook, stirring occasionally, for 2 minutes. Add the remaining sauce
ingredients and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to low and simmer gently
for 2 hours, stirring every once in a while.
      2. Strain the sauce, pushing on the solids with a wooden spoon to
extract all the liquid. The sauce should have about the same consistency as
the standard Lea & Perrins Worcestershire sauce. Set aside.
       3. Light a two-level ﬁre in your grill, putting about three quarters of
the coals on one side and one quarter on the other. When the ﬁre dies
down, the coals on one side should be hot (you can hold your hand 5
inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds) and those on the other
side medium-hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface
for 3 to 4 seconds).
      4. Make the hobo packs: Tear off eight sheets of heavy-duty foil,
each about 2 feet long, and stack them one on top of the other. Arrange
half the mushrooms in the center of the top sheet and drizzle with half of
the olive oil. Sprinkle half the minced garlic, half the herbs, and half the
sherry over the mushrooms and season with salt and pepper. Fold up the
top four of the sheets of foil around the vegetables, one after the other,
turning the package one quarter turn between each sheet and making sure
that each sheet is well sealed. Repeat this process with the remaining
ingredients so that you have two packs. Place the packs on the bottom of


                                                                          B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   97
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE             the grill off to one side, pile coals up around them, and cook for about 30
Get up in the middle of the      minutes, depending on the intensity of the coals.
night, douse the leftover
steak with the steak sauce,             5. Meanwhile, pat the steaks dry with paper towels and sprinkle
and have yourself an unfor­      them with the pepper and a generous amount of salt. Place them on the
gettable midnight snack.
                                 grill over the hot part of the ﬁre and cook until well seared, 4 to 5 minutes
                                 per side. Move to the cooler part of the ﬁre and continue to cook to the
                                 desired doneness, 10 to 12 minutes more cooking time for rare. To check
                                 for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part
                                 of the meat and take a peek; it should be slightly less done than you like it.
                                 When the meat is done to your liking, remove it from the heat, cover it
                                 loosely with foil, and let it rest for 5 minutes.
                                       6. Unwrap the hobo packs and serve with the steaks, passing the
                                 steak sauce on the side.




THE CUT                          Grilled Sirloin Steak High Plains
Sirloin steak is a broad
term that applies to a num­      Drifter–Style
ber of different steaks cut
from the sirloin of the cow,             S E RVE S 4
a transitional area between
the tough rump and the
pricey, tender short loin.       When we were kids, the meal that was most often held out as a treat was “a
Since this area is com­          nice, thick, juicy sirloin steak.” This is not surprising, since sirloin has long
posed of a number of mus­        been the single most popular supermarket steak. But there is also something
cles that can be cut up in
different ways, the termi­       about a grilled sirloin that reminds us of the straightforward nature and robust
nology can get confusing.        food of the Old West—or at least the Old West that is portrayed in movies. So
See The Real Deal on Sir­        this is our tribute to the cowboys and their long association with beef, camp­
loin (page 100) for more
information on this cut.         ﬁres, and forthright cooking.
                                         Here we coat the steaks with a simple spice paste that really comple­
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           ments their beefy ﬂavor. One of the main ingredients in this paste is paprika,
Any of the steaks from the       which we think is a neglected spice. But if you want to really add some com­
sirloin will work well here.
                                 plex ﬂavor to this dish, try to get hold of one of the artisanal dried red peppers
In fact, any steak, from
ﬂank to porterhouse to           that are beginning to appear in some markets these days. You might like the
New York strip, can be           warm, earthy Aleppo pepper from Syria, the darkly sweet Urfa or berry-like
used in this recipe. The
                                 Maras peppers from southern Turkey, or the intensely smoky pimentón de la
cooking time will vary
somewhat depending on            Vera from the remote Estremadura region of Spain. Mail-order spice houses
the thickness of the meat,       are starting to carry them, but the only place in the United States that we
but the spice paste goes
                                 know of that carries all four is Formaggio Kitchen in Cambridge, Massachu-
great with any of them.




98             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
setts, where our friends Valerie and Ihsan Gurdal preside over a store packed                  BUTCHERSPEAK

with amazing foods. (You can reach them at 888–212–3224.) On the other                        You may well have to go to
                                                                                              the butcher to get a sirloin
hand, paprika is also great.
                                                                                              steak this thick. To get the
      We like to serve this with a pile of grilled red onions, a Mushroom and                 very best, ask for a bone-in
Kale Hobo Pack (page 443), and a platter of sliced tomatoes sprinkled with                    round sirloin steak or a
                                                                                              shell sirloin.
basil, salt, and pepper and drizzled with a simple vinaigrette. Now, that’s a
great backyard dinner.

      2 tablespoons minced garlic
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh oregano
      2 tablespoons paprika (or dried pimentón de la Vera, Aleppo, Maras, or Urfa
         pepper if you can locate them)
      2 tablespoons cumin seeds, toasted in a dry skillet over medium heat,
         shaken frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes, if you want (or
         1 tablespoon ground cumin)
      3 tablespoons grainy mustard
      1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
      1⁄ 3   cup red wine vinegar
      One 3-pound bone-in or 21 ⁄ 2-pound boneless sirloin steak, 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Light a two-level ﬁre in your grill, putting about three quarters of
the coals on one side and about one quarter on the other side.
       2. In a small bowl, combine the garlic, oregano, paprika, cumin,
mustard, olive oil, and vinegar and mix well. Dry the steak with paper tow­
els, sprinkle it with salt and pepper, and then coat it generously with the
spice paste.
      3. When the ﬁre dies down and the coals are hot on one side (you can
hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds) and                        COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

medium-hot on the other (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill                      With the ﬂavorful spice
surface for 3 to 4 seconds), place the steak on the grill directly over the                   paste on the meat, left­
                                                                                              overs of this steak dish
hottest part of the ﬁre and sear well on one side, 4 to 5 minutes. Turn and                   make a fantastic steak
sear well on the second side, another 4 to 5 minutes. Move to the cool part                   sandwich. All you need to
of the ﬁre and continue to cook until done to your liking, 10 to 12 minutes                   add is the bread. If you
for rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in                have any spice paste left
                                                                                              over, cover and refrigerate
the thickest part of the meat and take a peek; it should be slightly less done                it and use it to add a ton of
than you like it. Remove the steak from the grill, cover it loosely with foil,                ﬂavor to any type of simple
and allow to rest for 5 minutes before serving.                                               grilled meat.




                                                                            B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          99
  THE REAL DEAL ON SIRLOIN
  Among all the beefsteaks, the single most popular one for home consumption is the sirloin. That makes
  sense, because with its price value, it is an ideal family steak. After all, if you’ve got a couple of bottomless-
  pit teenagers at the table, you’re not likely to be serving up ultra pricey ﬁlet mignon (still the most popular
  steak in restaurants).
       But sirloin can also be the most confusing steak of all. It is one of those cuts of meat that is called dif­
  ferent names in different parts of the country, or even in the same region. As a result, buying it in the super­
  market can be chancy. But here are some guidelines.
       The sirloin portion of a steer falls between the luxuriously tender short loin and the rather tough rump.
  In other words, it is basically the hip of the animal. Because it contains the large hipbone, cutting it into
  retail portions can be problematic. This has led to a lot of variation, not only in individual steaks but in the
  whole approach to how to cut them.
       In the past, butchers tended to cut the sirloin against the grain through the bone, and some old-style
  butchers still do so. This creates four different steaks named according to the part of the hipbone they con­
  tain. Working from front to back, they are known as pin bone, ﬂat bone, round bone, and wedge bone sirloin
  steaks. Although the pin bone steak is the most tender, it also has a high proportion of bone to meat, so the
  best choice for a bone-in sirloin steak is the round bone. It can be quite large, running three pounds or more
  when cut an inch thick, and has the fewest fat seams of any bone-in sirloin steak.
       Today, though, the most popular approach is to cut the sirloin with the grain, producing boneless
  steaks. These steaks are usually labeled according to the particular muscles from which they are cut. From
  the top sirloin come steaks with names like top sirloin or top butt steak, hip sirloin steak, bifteck sirloin
  steak, and center-cut sirloin steak. Although they can be a bit chewy, all of these steaks are tender enough
  to treat as you would steaks from the short loin: Grill or broil them and serve them up in all their juicy glory.
  Steaks from the bottom sirloin, usually called bottom sirloin butt or ball tip steaks, as well as steaks simply
  labeled “sirloin,” which come from the portion of the sirloin closest to the leg, are usually a bit tougher. The
  best approach with these tougher steaks is to treat them like London broil: Grill them and cut them very thin
  against the grain.
       The boneless approach to butchering the sirloin has also resulted in a very popular steak called the tri­
  tip. This is a small triangular muscle located at the bottom end of the bottom sirloin. In the past, when the
  sirloin was typically cut bone-in, this muscle was included as a small section of larger steaks. But with the
  boneless approach, it is cut into distinct steaks. Sometimes called culotte or triangle steaks as well as tri­
  tips, these steaks are particularly popular on the West Coast, where for some reason they are much more
  readily available than in the rest of the country. While it’s not a bad steak, we think it’s overrated, and
  wouldn’t go out of our way to search for it. (If you see a tri-tip roast, though, it’s worth picking up.)
       But the very best “sirloin steak” of all is one that is not technically a sirloin at all. On the East Coast,
  butchers tend to call the ultra-tender—and pricey—top loin steak a sirloin. Another variation on this theme is
  the shell sirloin. These are bone-in steaks cut from the small section that connects the short loin and the sir­
  loin, technically known as the shell loin. A shell sirloin steak will be nearly as tender as a top loin steak.
       So what does all of this mean? Simply that this is one of those cases in which it pays to look carefully
  at the meat you are buying, since one particular steak with the name “sirloin” in its label may be very differ­
  ent from another.




100          H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Stir-fried Sirloin Tips with                                                                   THE CUT

                                                                                              Sirloin is the #1 most pop­

Ginger, Peanuts, and Scallions                                                                ular steak for home cook­
                                                                                              ing in this country. That

over Smoky Sesame Cabbage                                                                     means that a lot of sirloins
                                                                                              are being cut in a lot of
                                                                                              supermarkets and butcher
      S E RVE S 4                                                                             shops around the country,
                                                                                              which translates into plenty
We have always been big fans of “tips,” which are a staple of restaurant                      of little pieces that are left
                                                                                              over and sold as “tips.”
menus in New England. Tips are generally the pieces left over from tender
cuts of beef after the butcher has sliced as many steaks as he can out of                      OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
them. So it’s a good way to get tender meat at a low price. Tips are also per­                The best option for substi­
fect for stir-fries, because you want small pieces of meat. The key here, as                  tution in this recipe is the
                                                                                              very tender (and quite
with any stir-fry preparation, is to use very high heat.
                                                                                              cheap) top blade steak;
      Serve this over white rice and you have a full meal, using the Asian                    just be sure to remove the
approach of employing meat for ﬂavor and texture rather than putting it at the                line of gristle down the
                                                                                              center before cutting it into
center of the plate.
                                                                                              matchsticks. Tenderloin
      F OR TH E CAB BAG E
                                                                                              tips are also great.
      1 ⁄4   cup soy sauce
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
      1 teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes
      1⁄ 2   teaspoon sugar
      1 tablespoon olive oil
      1 tablespoon sesame oil
      2 cups very thinly sliced white cabbage
      1⁄ 2   cup very thinly sliced red cabbage
      1 small carrot, peeled and cut into matchsticks
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked white pepper to taste

      1 pound sirloin tips, cut into matchsticks about the size of your little ﬁnger
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked white pepper to taste
      1 tablespoon olive oil
      2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
      1 teaspoon minced garlic
      5 scallions (white and green parts), thinly sliced on the bias
      1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped peanuts, toasted in a dry skillet over medium heat,
             shaken frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes


     1. In a large bowl, combine the soy sauce, lime juice, red pepper
ﬂakes, and sugar. Mix well and set aside.
     2. In a large sauté pan, heat the oils over high heat until very hot but
not smoking. Add the white and red cabbage and carrot and cook, stirring

                                                                            B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          101
                                 vigorously, until heated through, 2 to 3 minutes. Add to the bowl with the
                                 lime-soy dressing (set the pan aside), toss gently, and season with salt and
                                 white pepper. Set aside.
                                       3. Dry the meat with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with
                                 salt and white pepper. Wipe out the sauté pan and return it to high heat.
                                 Add the olive oil and heat until very hot but not smoking. Add the meat
                                 and stir-fry, tossing it constantly, until it is just cooked through, about 2 to
                                 3 minutes. Add the ginger, garlic, scallions, and peanuts, toss a couple of
                                 times to combine, and immediately remove the pan from the heat.
                                         4. Place some of   the cabbage on each plate and top with the stir-fry.




THE CUT

See Grilled Sirloin Steak
                                 Laotian-Style Aromatic Beef Salad
High Plains Drifter–Style
                                         S E RVE S 4
(page 98) for details on sir­
loin steak and how to buy
it. You can use any of the       I (Doc) discovered this dish a couple of years ago on a trip to Laos with my
steaks cut from the sirloin
                                 friend Carl Taplin and Porn Chanthirath, a Laotian woman who runs the
for this recipe, but the best
is the cut labeled simply        Bangkok Restaurant in Ellsworth, Maine, with her husband, Sisouk. For Porn,
“sirloin steak.” Other good      who was returning to her homeland for the ﬁrst time after escaping in the
options include the shell
                                 early 1970s, this was a true emotional voyage. For Carl and me, it was a
sirloin steak and the tri-tip
sirloin steak.                   chance to see Southeast Asia at its unspoiled best. Despite the efforts of the
                                 ruling Pathet Lao party, Buddhism is still the major motivating force in this iso­
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           lated, landlocked country. Perhaps as a result, the pace of life is slow, the
Any relatively tender steak      people are incredibly gentle and friendly, and the streets of many cities are
will do well here. This is
also another great place to
                                 still ﬁlled with young monks in robes of various shades of orange. The food is
substitute the tender chuck      also fantastic.
blade steak. Tenderloin                  This meat salad, called laap, is the national dish of the country, available
tips, sirloin tips, or even a
round steak, thinly sliced,
                                 at every street-corner stall and open-air restaurant. It can be made with ﬁsh,
would also work ﬁne here.        pork, or water buffalo meat, for which we substitute beef. It is served—as is
                                 just about everything else in Laos—accompanied by a wicker basket of sticky
                                 rice, for which you can substitute any type of steamed white rice if you can’t
                                 get sticky rice.
                                         But sticky rice also contributes another distinctive ﬂavor to the dish in
                                 the form of browned rice powder. To make it, you just sear sticky rice in a dry
                                 skillet, then grind it into a powder. You can make this without the browned
                                 sticky rice powder and it will still be delicious and very refreshing; it will just
                                 taste more Thai than Laotian.



102            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1 ⁄4   cup sticky rice
     2 tomatoes, cored and quartered
     2 cucumbers, peeled, seeded, and cut into 1-inch cubes
     4 ounces green beans, blanched in boiling salted water for 3 minutes,
        cooled in ice water, and drained
     1⁄ 2   cup or so fresh basil leaves
     2 teaspoons vegetable oil
     One 1-pound beef sirloin steak, trimmed and very thinly sliced
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     1 teaspoon minced fresh red chile pepper
     3 tablespoons fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
     1 tablespoon ﬁsh sauce (nam pla)
     1 ⁄4   cup minced scallions (white and green parts)
     3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh cilantro
     1 ⁄4   cup fresh mint leaves
     Additional fresh cilantro and mint leaves for garnish (optional)


      1. Make the browned rice powder: Place the sticky rice in a dry heavy
sauté pan and cook over medium-high heat, stirring or shaking the pan
very frequently, until the rice begins to smoke slightly and is nicely
browned, 4 to 6 minutes. Remove from the heat and crush in a mortar and
pestle or pulse in a spice grinder until the rice forms a coarse powder; do
not grind completely ﬁne. Set aside.
      2. Arrange the tomatoes, cucumbers, green beans, and basil in sepa­
rate piles on a large platter; set aside.
      3. In a wok or heavy sauté pan, heat the oil over high heat until hot
but not smoking. Dry the beef strips with paper towels and sprinkle them
generously with salt and pepper, then add them to the pan and cook, stir­
ring briskly, until just browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Remove from the heat,
transfer to a large bowl, add the browned rice powder, and stir well to
combine.
      4. Add the chile peppers, lime juice, ﬁsh sauce, and scallions and stir
well. Garnish with the cilantro and mint leaves, if desired, and serve,
accompanied by rice and the platter of vegetables and basil so that your
guests can add what they choose to the salad.




                                                                        B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   103
THE CUT

The thin tapered end of the
                                  Grilled Polynesian-Style
tenderloin, which is the end
nearest the front of the
                                  Tenderloin Tip Kebabs with
cow, is really too small and
thin to cut into steaks, and      Bacon, Pineapple, and Peppers
it is often cut off when the
whole tenderloin is sold as               S E RVE S 4

a roast, so the roast is of a
more even thickness. So           In my (Chris’s) early years, one of my favorite restaurants was the Blue Hawaii
that little end is often cut
into tips, which are incredi­
                                  in Norfolk, Virginia. It was there that I learned to love pupu platters, cheesy
bly tender. Basically what        paper leis, tiny umbrellas in drinks, and that little blue Sterno ﬂame on the
you’re talking about here         table. This dish is a tribute to that formative restaurant.
are ﬁlet mignon tips.
                                          It’s important to get the thickest bacon that you can ﬁnd for this kebab,

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                  then precook it a little bit so that the meat itself is cooked but the fat is still a
Sirloin tips are ﬁne, and if      little bit ﬂoppy. We use it in a variation of the old bacon-wrapped pineapple,
you can ﬁnd a thick chuck         but add some really tender cubes of tenderloin and a few squares of red bell
top blade steak, it will also
                                  pepper to transform it into a main course. The glaze we employ here is very
work very well here. Simply
cut out the central line of       simple to make, but it gives the kebab a ton of ﬂavor. If the meat starts to get
gristle and cut the two           too dark as it cooks, it’s simple enough to just move it to the edge of the ﬁre to
halves into cubes.
                                  ﬁnish cooking. But make sure that you do get a good, solid, crusty sear on the
                                  outside, because that is what is going to give it that wonderful grilled ﬂavor.
BUTCHERSPEAK

A high-quality butcher is a
                                          Try serving this with white rice or Simple Rice Pilaf (page 417) and
good place to get tender­         Roasted Asparagus (page 427) drizzled with a simple vinaigrette.
loin tips. If you don’t see
any in the case, you might                4 slices thick-cut bacon or thick slices of slab bacon
ask him if he’s planning to
cut any tenderloin steaks                 FOR THE GLAZE
or roasts, and, if so, if you             1⁄ 3   cup molasses
can buy the tips.
                                          2 tablespoons fresh lime juice (about 1 lime)
                                          3 tablespoons soy sauce
                                          1 teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes

                                          2 pounds tenderloin tips, cut into 2-inch cubes
                                          2 tablespoons sesame oil
                                          Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                          Sixteen 1-inch cubes fresh pineapple (about 1 ⁄ 2 pineapple)
                                          2 red bell peppers, cored, seeded, and cut into 2-inch squares




104             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

       2. In a small sauté pan, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until
it is cooked through but not crisp, about 5 minutes. Drain on paper towels
or a brown paper bag, then cut into 1-inch pieces and set aside.
      3. Make the glaze: In a small bowl, combine the molasses, lime juice,
soy sauce, and red pepper ﬂakes. Mix well and set aside.
     4. Dry the tenderloin tips with paper towels. In a large bowl, toss the
tenderloin tips with the sesame oil and salt and pepper, thoroughly coating
the meat.
        5. Thread the beef, bacon, pineapple, and red peppers alternately
onto skewers. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot
(you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds),
place the kebabs on the grill and cook, turning once, for 5 to 6 minutes per
side for rare. During the last 30 seconds or so of cooking, brush the kebabs
heavily with the glaze. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make
a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less done
than you like it.
      6. Remove the kebabs from the grill, drizzle with the remaining
glaze, and serve hot.




                                                                       B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   105
THE CUT

This cut comes from the
                                 Herb-Crusted Grilled Top Round
round, which is the upper
leg. The round has three
                                 Steak “London Broil–Style” with
muscles: top round, eye
round, and bottom round.         Maître d’Hôtel Butter and Smoky
Only the top round is ten­
der enough to be a worthy        Balsamic Onions
candidate for steak. This is
deﬁnitely a supermarket                  S E RVE S 4 TO 6
cut, but if you go to a
butcher (or are friendly
                                 Grandma Wetzler used to frequently cook top round for me (Chris) when I
with the supermarket
butcher), you can ask for a      visited her in State College, Pennsylvania. I remember her bringing home the
ﬁrst-cut top round steak.        big hunk of meat, scoring it all over, dredging it in ﬂour, and then frying it up in
This is the section of the
                                 her big cast-iron frying pan. The resulting steak had a little chew to it—this is
round closest to the sirloin,
and it is the most tender.       not the most tender steak in the world—but it also had a tremendous amount
                                 of ﬂavor. Since then, I’ve cooked plenty of top round myself, and I’ve found
OTHER NAMES                      that if you slice it very thin, it is an excellent steak. Plus, it’s a great way to
Short cut round steak, top       save some money. When I was young and on a budget, I swear I ate this
round London broil.
                                 steak four out of seven nights a week, and I enjoyed it every time.
                                         If you’re in a hurry, you can leave out the onions here. If you do, though,
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Flank steak or a true sirloin    try cooking them up some other time, because they make an inspiring top­
steak (see page 100 for a        ping for steak of any kind.
discussion of sirloin) would
                                         Try this with some grilled bread, pan-roasted potatoes, and simple
also be really good in this
recipe.                          steamed broccoli. (The ﬂavored butter is great on the broccoli too.)

                                         FOR THE BUTTER
                                         1⁄ 2   pound (2 sticks) unsalted butter, at room temperature
                                         1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 lemon)
                                         4 dashes Tabasco sauce
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                         3 tablespoons olive oil
                                         2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                         1 cup roughly chopped fresh herbs: any one or a combination of parsley,
                                            sage, rosemary, thyme, basil, and/or oregano
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         One 3-pound top round steak, about 2 inches thick

                                         FOR THE ONIONS

                                         2 large red onions, peeled and cut into thick slices
                                         1 ⁄4   cup olive oil




106            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                                COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE
      1 ⁄4   cup balsamic vinegar                                                         Any leftovers can be turned
                                                                                          into that often-denigrated
      1 teaspoon sugar
                                                                                          but totally delicious diner
      2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 lemon)                                 classic, the Hot Roast Beef
                                                                                          Sandwich. Just lay the beef
      1. Light a two-level ﬁre in your grill, putting about three quarters of             between two slices of
                                                                                          white bread, plop some
the coals on one side and about one quarter on the other side.
                                                                                          mashed potatoes down
      2. Make the butter: In a medium bowl, combine the butter, garlic,                   alongside, cover them both
                                                                                          with gravy, and have your
parsley, lemon juice, Tabasco, and salt and pepper and mix well. Place the                knife and fork ready for
butter on a piece of waxed paper or plastic wrap, roll it into a cylinder, and            action.
refrigerate until ﬁrm.
      3. In a small bowl, combine the olive oil, garlic, herbs, and salt and
pepper and mix well. Dry the steak with paper towels, then rub it all over
with the herb mixture, pressing gently to make sure it adheres.
       4. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are hot on one side
(you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds)
and medium-hot on the other (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the
grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds), place the steak over the hottest part of the
ﬁre and cook until well seared on both sides, 5 to 6 minutes per side. Move
to the medium-hot part of the grill and cook, turning once, 4 to 6 minutes
more for rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch
cut in the thickest part of the meat and take a peek; it should be slightly
less done than you like it. When the steak is done to your liking, remove it
from the grill, cover it loosely with foil, and let it rest for 5 minutes.
       5. Meanwhile cook the onions: Rub the onion slices with the olive
oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and place them on the medium-hot side
of the grill. Cook until just tender and seared, 4 to 5 minutes per side.
Remove from the grill and place in a large bowl. Add the balsamic vinegar,
sugar, and lemon juice and toss well.
      6. Unwrap the butter and cut it into 1 ⁄4-inch slices. Slice the steak very
thin, place it on a platter or individual plates, top with the butter slices,
scatter the grilled onions over it, and serve at once.




                                                                        B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T        107
THE CUT

This most surprising
                                 Seared Balsamic-Glazed Top
aspect of the top blade is
that it comes from the
                                 Blade Chuck Steaks with Spinach,
chuck, or forequarter, of the
cow. Since this is the pri­      Lemon, and Olive Oil
mary weight-bearing sec­
tion of the beast, cuts from             S E RVE S 4

the chuck are usually very
tough, though ﬂavorful. But      Like an underutilized species of ﬁsh, the underappreciated top blade chuck
the top blade breaks this
mold. While participating in
                                 steak is a culinary hidden gem just waiting to be discovered. Unlike other
a course at Texas A & M          cuts from the chuck, it is exquisitely tender; in fact, it is the second most ten­
University called “Beef          der piece of meat on the cow, surpassed only by the hyper-expensive tender­
101,” I (Doc) saw meat sci­
entists measure beef
                                 loin. Despite this, the top blade is only about half the price of other less
toughness with the help of       tender steaks.
a highly specialized piece               So, you say, there has to be a catch—and you’re right. Running smack
of equipment. When the top
blade was put up against
                                 down the center of each top blade steak is a line of inedible cartilage. There
all other cuts of beef, it       are several ways to deal with this problem though. You can simply eat around
came in second only to the       the offending cartilage and leave it on your plate. Or you can do as we do in
extremely pricey tenderloin.
A blind tasting of ten cuts
                                 this recipe, cook the steak and then slice the cartilage out before serving. A
of beef held at the end of       third option is to remove this line of gristle before cooking and cut the steak
the course conﬁrmed the          into chunks for stir-fries or skewers. Any of these will give you incredibly ten­
machine’s evaluation: Top
blade was rated extremely
                                 der beef with great ﬂavor for relatively little money.
tender by all tasters. If you            This is a simple preparation, but with the sweet-sour glaze and the
can get past the line of         lemon and garlic in the spinach, it has plenty of ﬂavors going for it. We like it
gristle in the center of this
cut, it is a real sleeper.
                                 with French Fries (page 411).

                                         FOR THE GLAZE
OTHER NAMES
                                         11 ⁄ 2 cups balsamic vinegar
Book steak, butler steak,
                                         1 teaspoon sugar
lifter steak, petite steak,
ﬂatiron steak.                           1 tablespoon freshly cracked black pepper
                                         Four 8-ounce top blade steaks, about 1 inch thick
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                   Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
This recipe is supremely                 2 tablespoons olive oil
adaptable; any steak will
work just ﬁne. The ﬂank                  FOR TH E S PI NACH
and skirt are particularly               2 tablespoons olive oil
nice choices because they
                                         11 ⁄ 2 pounds fresh spinach, trimmed, well washed, and dried
have the same type of
deep, beefy ﬂavor that you               1 tablespoon minced garlic
get from this cut.                       Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 lemon)




108            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1. Make the glaze: In a small saucepan, bring the vinegar, sugar, and               BUTCHERSPEAK

pepper to a boil over high heat. Reduce the heat to medium-low and sim­                 This cut can be found in
                                                                                        most supermarkets, but be
mer vigorously until the mixture is reduced by two thirds and syrupy, 30 to
                                                                                        careful: You don’t want to
40 minutes. Set aside, covered to keep warm.                                            buy the chuck blade steak
                                                                                        instead of the top blade
      2. Pat the steaks dry with paper towels, then sprinkle them gener­
                                                                                        chuck steak. The chuck
ously with salt and pepper. In a large sauté pan (or two small sauté pans, to           blade is about three levels
avoid crowding), heat the olive oil over medium-high heat until very hot                farther down on the tender­
but not smoking. Add the steaks and sear well on one side, 3 to 4 minutes.              ness scale and is better
                                                                                        suited for slow moist-
Turn and continue cooking for a total of 4 to 6 minutes for rare. To check
                                                                                        cooking methods that melt
for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part           the stringy collagen it con­
of the meat and take a peek; it should be slightly less done than you like it.          tains. Though top blade
When the steaks are done to your liking, remove them from the pan, cover                chuck is usually clearly
                                                                                        labeled in supermarkets,
loosely with foil, and set aside to rest while you prepare the spinach.
                                                                                        it is also recognizable
      3. Wipe out the pan with paper towels and return it to medium-high                because its chunky trian­
                                                                                        gular shape resembles an
heat. Add the oil to the pan. When it is hot, add the spinach and stir it like          old-fashioned iron.
crazy until it wilts, 1 to 2 minutes. Add the garlic and cook, stirring, for
another 30 seconds. Remove the pan from the heat, season with salt and
pepper, and stir in the lemon juice.
     4. Cut the center line of gristle out of each steak and brush each half
generously with the glaze. Place a mound of spinach on each diner’s plate,
top with two steak halves, and serve.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T        109
THE CUT

Skirt steak comes from the
                                  Southeast Asian–Style Grilled
short plate section of the
cow, which is the inside of
                                  Skirt Steak with Aromatic Greens
the rib on the chest. It is an
odd-looking piece of meat,        and Ginger-Lime Dressing
long and ﬂat with a very
pronounced grain.                         S E RVE S 4

Although it can be quite
tough, if you cook it quickly     We really love Thai-style salads in which herbs are used as greens, the dress­
over high heat and then
slice it very thin against the
                                  ing is highly aromatic and spicy, and the meat or ﬁsh is a building block rather
grain, you end up with ten­       than the center of the plate. Not only do they have a very vibrant ﬂavor
der and remarkably ﬂavor­         dynamic, but they have the added advantage of being healthful to boot. Here
ful meat. This is the cut of
meat originally used for
                                  we use the classic Southeast Asian herb trio of mint, cilantro, and basil as
both fajitas and Philadel­        greens, along with some spicy arugula. (Although you will lose some of the
phia cheese steak sand­           ﬂavor dynamic, you can substitute the lettuce of your choice for the combina­
wiches, which is probably
why both of those items
                                  tion of arugula and herbs.)
became wildly popular.                    For the meat, we use one of our absolute favorites, the skirt steak. To
                                  us, this is the best reasonably priced supermarket steak you can ﬁnd.
OTHER NAMES                       Because it has a higher fat content than other similar steaks, such as ﬂank
Fajitas meat, Philadelphia
                                  steak and hanger steak, it is more richly ﬂavorful. When grilled and cut very
steak.
                                  thin on the bias, against the grain, it is as ﬁne a piece of beef as you will ﬁnd.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                    This dish is a meal in itself, with the possible addition of a bowl of
You can use just about any        brown or white rice.
steak you want in this
recipe. If you want to keep               1 ⁄4   cup soy sauce
it inexpensive, go with top               2 tablespoons cracked coriander seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground coriander)
round. Or, even better, try
the super-tender but inex­
                                          2 tablespoons freshly cracked white pepper (or 1 tablespoon ground white
                                             pepper)
pensive chuck top blade
steak; just be sure to                    11 ⁄ 2 pounds skirt steak, cut into 4 portions
remove the line of gristle
                                          FOR THE DRESSING
running down the center.
                                          1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
BUTCHERSPEAK                              2 tablespoons sesame oil
Some butchers prefer                      1 teaspoon sugar
either the inside skirt or                1⁄ 2   cup fresh lime juice (about 4 limes)
the outside skirt. If you
                                          2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
have a choice, go for the
outside, which is a little                1 to 3 teaspoons ﬁnely minced fresh chile peppers of your choice
thicker and a bit less                    Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
stringy.

                                          2 bunches arugula, trimmed, washed, and dried
                                          1 cup fresh mint leaves
                                          1 cup fresh cilantro leaves (some stems are OK)
                                          1 cup fresh Thai basil leaves (or substitute regular basil)



110             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1 large carrot, peeled and cut into matchsticks                                          COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

      1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and cut into matchsticks                              If by chance you have any
                                                                                              leftover meat, use it in a
      1 cucumber, peeled, seeded, and cut into matchsticks
                                                                                              steak sandwich. If you have
      1⁄ 2   cup unsalted peanuts, toasted in a dry skill over medium heat, shaken            both salad and meat, stuff
             frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes, and chopped
                                                                                              it all inside a pita pocket
                                                                                              for a great lunch.
      1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

     2. In a shallow dish, combine the soy sauce, coriander, and white
pepper and mix well. Put the steak in the dish and turn to coat it well.
        3. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are hot (you can hold
your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds), place the
steak on the grill and cook until well seared on one side, about 4 minutes.
Turn and continue to cook to desired doneness, about 6 minutes total
cooking time for rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make
a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less done
than you like it. Remove the steak from the grill, cover it loosely with foil,
and allow it to rest while you make the dressing.
      4. In a medium bowl, whisk the dressing ingredients together until
well combined. Place the arugula, herbs, carrot, bell pepper, and cucum­
ber in a large bowl, add as much of the dressing as you like, and toss well.
      5. Thinly slice the steak on the bias, against the grain. Place a serving
of greens on each plate, top with a few slices of steak, and garnish with the
peanuts.




                                                                            B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T        111
THE CUT

See Southeast Asian–Style
                                Lime-Soaked, Cumin-Crusted
Grilled Skirt Steak (page
110) for details on skirt
                                Grilled Skirt Steak with Green
steak and how to buy it.
                                Olive–Chile Relish
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                        S E RVE S 4
Flank steak is great here
and hanger steak would
also be ﬁne. Any of the top     Although we don’t often marinate, the unique striated texture of the skirt
round steaks or the chuck       steak makes it a good candidate for this technique. The lime juice actually
blade steak are also good
                                works it way into the ﬁbers of the meat, giving it some citrus ﬂavor. But don’t
options. If you use the
chuck blade, though,            let the meat sit in the juice for more than an hour, or the acid may start to
remember to remove the          make the surface of the meat unpleasantly mushy.
line of gristle that runs
                                        Chilean inﬂuences ﬁgure heavily in this dish, with its green olives,
down the center.
                                cumin, chiles, and lime juice. Serve this with grilled pita, Simple Rice Pilaf
                                (page 417), and a green salad.

                                        2 pounds skirt steak
                                        1 cup fresh lime juice (about 8 limes)

                                        FOR THE RUB

                                        3 tablespoons cumin seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons ground cumin)
                                        2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                        1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                        FOR THE RELISH
                                        1⁄ 2   cup ﬁnely chopped pitted green olives
                                        1 teaspoon chopped dried red chile peppers of your choice, or to taste
                                        1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                        2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper


                                     1. Place the steak in a shallow dish and pour the lime juice over it.
                                Cover the dish and let it sit in the refrigerator for 30 minutes to 1 hour,
                                turning occasionally.
                                        2. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

                                      3. In a small bowl, combine all the rub ingredients and mix well.
                                Remove the steak from the marinade, pat dry with paper towels, and rub it
                                all over with the spice rub, pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
                                     4. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are hot (you can hold
                                your hand 5 inches from the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds), place the steak
                                on the grill and cook until well seared on one side, about 4 minutes. Turn


112           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
and continue to cook to the desired doneness, about 4 minutes more for                          COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in                     Leftover steak from this
                                                                                               dish is great in a simple
the thickest part of the meat and take a peek; it should be slightly less done
                                                                                               salad of Romaine lettuce,
than you like it. Remove the steak from the heat, cover it loosely with foil,                  olives, and tomatoes. If you
and allow it to rest for 5 minutes while you make the relish.                                  have any relish left, toss
                                                                                               that into the salad too.
      5. In a medium bowl, combine all the relish ingredients and mix well.

      6. Slice the steak as thin as possible against the grain and serve with
the relish.


Sliced Grilled Skirt Steak on                                                                   THE CUT

                                                                                               See the description in

Greek Salad                                                                                    Southeast Asian–Style
                                                                                               Grilled Skirt Steak (page
                                                                                               110) for details on skirt
      S E RVE S 4 TO 6
                                                                                               steak and how to buy it.

This is another example of steak served on top of greens, which for some rea­                   OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
son we ﬁnd particularly appealing. Maybe it’s because, particularly with a rich                Flank steak is an obvious,
cut of beef like skirt steak, the freshness of the greens and the acid of the                  and excellent, substitute
                                                                                               here, and hanger steak is
dressing balance out the meat so nicely.                                                       also ﬁne.
      Serve this with grilled pita, rough red wine, and an ouzo chaser.

      2 tablespoons olive oil
      2 tablespoons minced garlic
      1 teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      2 pounds skirt steak

      FOR THE DRESSING
      1⁄ 2   cup extra virgin olive oil
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
      3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh oregano (or substitute
         11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons dried)
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      FOR THE SALAD

      2 small heads romaine lettuce, washed, dried, and torn into bite-sized
         pieces
      1⁄ 2   cup good-quality black olives, pitted
      1 medium cucumber, peeled, seeded, and diced medium
      1 large tomato (about the size of a baseball), cored and diced large
      1⁄ 2   cup crumbled feta cheese




                                                                             B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T        113
                                          1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

                                        2. In a small bowl, combine the olive oil, garlic, red pepper ﬂakes, and
                                  salt and pepper and mix well. Dry the skirt steak with paper towels, then
                                  rub it generously with this mixture, pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
                                        3. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are covered with white
                                  ash, check the temperature: you want a hot ﬁre here (you can hold your
                                  hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds). Place the steak on
                                  the grill and sear well on one side, about 4 minutes. Turn and continue
                                  cooking to the desired doneness, about 6 minutes more for rare. To check
                                  for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part
                                  of the meat and take a peek; it should be slightly less done than you like it.
                                  Remove the meat from the grill, cover it loosely with foil, and let it rest
                                  while you prepare the dressing.
                                        4. In a large bowl, whisk together the olive oil, lemon juice, oregano,
                                  and salt and pepper until well combined. Add the lettuce, olives, cucum­
                                  ber, and tomato and toss well to thoroughly coat with the dressing, then
                                  crumble the feta cheese on top.
                                        5. Slice the steak very thin on the bias against the grain. Place the salad
                                  on a serving platter or individual plates, top with the slices of steak, and serve.

THE CUT

Flank steak, which comes
                                  Fennel-Crusted Flank Steak with
from the lower rear side of
the beast, is a long, rela­
                                  Orange–Black Olive Relish and
tively thin steak with a dis­
tinctive longitudinal grain. It   Spicy Mint Honey
can be tough if not prop­
erly prepared, but if cooked              S E RVE S 4
quickly to rare or medium-
rare and then sliced very
                                  Here we ﬁnd a collection of ﬂavors from one of the great culinary regions of
thin on the bias, against
the grain, it is perfectly ten­   the world, North Africa. Oranges and black olives are a classic Moroccan
der. That’s good, because it      combination, and mint and honey are both widely used throughout the region.
lets you fully enjoy this
                                  Fennel, which is also popular in North Africa, is a great spice that is not used
cut’s very rich, deep, beefy
ﬂavor. (It can also be            often enough in our country. In this dish, each of these components plays off
cooked very slowly and            the other: The relish is very citrusy, which sets up the ﬂavor of the beef nicely;
comes out great; see
                                  the honey glaze subdues the acid in the relish; and the fennel seeds provide
Puerto Rican Vinegar-
Braised Flank Steak, page         crunch and a subtle, licoricey sweetness to balance everything out.
77.) Flank steak is easily                To segment the oranges, peel them with a sharp knife, removing the
recognizable by its longitu­
                                  white pith entirely. Cut between the membranes and remove each section
dinal grain, and it is readily
available in most super­          whole, taking care to remove the seeds.
markets.                                  Try serving this with grilled pita bread, a carrot and raisin salad, and
                                  couscous or Simple Rice Pilaf (page 417).


114             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      FOR THE RELISH                                                                      OTHER NAMES
      1⁄ 2   small red onion, peeled and diced small                                     London broil, jiffy steak.
      1⁄ 2   cup orange segments (see headnote)
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped pitted black olives                                      OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

      1 ⁄4   cup fresh orange juice                                                      Skirt steak is a good sub­
                                                                                         stitute here. You could
      1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                                                                         even go with a sirloin
      1 teaspoon minced garlic                                                           steak.
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
      1 tablespoon freshly cracked black pepper

      FOR THE HONEY
      1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh mint
      2 tablespoons cumin seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground cumin)
      1 teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes
      1 ⁄4   cup honey

      2 tablespoons olive oil
      1⁄ 2   cup crushed fennel seeds
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      One 21 ⁄ 2-pound ﬂank steak, about 1 inch thick


      1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

      2. In a medium bowl, combine all the relish ingredients and mix well;
set aside.
     3. Make the honey: In a small bowl, combine the mint, cumin, red
pepper ﬂakes, and honey and mix well. Set this aside too.
     4. In another small bowl, combine the olive oil, fennel seeds, and salt
and pepper and mix well. Dry the steak with paper towels, then rub it gen­
erously with this mixture, pressing to make sure it adheres.
       5. When the ﬁre dies down and the coals are covered with white ash,
check the temperature: you want a hot ﬁre here (you can hold your hand 5
inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds). Place the steak on the grill
and sear well on one side, about 4 minutes. Turn and continue to cook to
the desired doneness, about 4 minutes more for rare. To check for doneness
nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it           COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE
should be slightly less done than you like it. Remove the steak from the                 Stuff any leftover steak into
grill, cover it loosely with foil, and allow it to sit for about 5 minutes.              a pita along with the left­
                                                                                         over relish and some fresh
     6. Slice the steak thin against the grain, on the bias, and serve accom­            cucumber slices, and your
panied by the relish and the honey.                                                      lunch is ready.




                                                                       B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T             115
  THE THREE FLAT STEAKS
  Most beef steaks are cut from thick muscles, particularly those of the short loin and sirloin. But there are
  three steaks that don’t ﬁt this mold, because they are actually relatively ﬂat pieces of meat. All three of
  them—ﬂank steak, skirt steak, and hanger steak—have recently undergone a transformation from neglected
  to fashionable, as people have discovered that ﬂavor can be more important than texture, even when you’re
  talking about steaks.
       These three newly popular steaks share the distinction of coming from the chest and side of the animal.
  Hanger and ﬂank both come from the rear of the side, while skirt comes from the area between the
  abdomen and the chest cavity. In addition to location, these steaks share certain other basic qualities: All are
  long, relatively thin, quite tough and grainy, but with rich, deep, beefy ﬂavor. In other words, they are embodi­
  ments of the inverse relationship between toughness and ﬂavor in meat: The tougher the meat, the more ﬂa­
  vor it tends to have.
       Of course, there are also differences between these ﬂavorful steaks. Hanger, a thick muscle that is
  attached to the diaphragm, derives its name from the fact that when a cow is butchered, this steak hangs
  down into the center of the carcass. It used to be called “butcher’s steak” because butchers tended to take it
  home and eat it themselves. Because it is a classic French bistro dish, though, this cut is highly prized by
  restaurants and therefore difﬁcult to ﬁnd in butcher shops. To our mind, this is no great loss, since hangers
  have the toughest texture and least rich, beefy ﬂavor of these three cuts.
       Fortunately, ﬂank steak is quite easy to ﬁnd in any butcher shop or supermarket. Easily recognizable
  from its longitudinal grain, ﬂank has excellent beef ﬂavor and is quite tender if cooked to rare or medium-
  rare and sliced thin against the grain. Unfortunately, largely because of the popularity of fajitas and London
  broil, ﬂank has become a relatively expensive cut.
       The skirt steak, which was the cut originally used in fajitas, can also be hard to locate in supermarkets
  or butcher shops. This is a real pity, because the skirt steak is a beef eater’s dream come true. It has more fat
  than the hanger or ﬂank, which makes it juicier and richer; at the same time, it also has a deep, full beefy ﬂa­
  vor that outdoes either the ﬂank or the hanger. If you can get your hands on a skirt steak, by all means do so.
  We promise you won’t be sorry.




116          H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Korean-Style Grilled Short Ribs                                                                 THE CUT

                                                                                               See Black Pepper–Crusted

with Ginger, Chiles, and Quick                                                                 Wine-Braised Short Ribs
                                                                                               (page 75) for details on

Kimchee                                                                                        short ribs. For this rather
                                                                                               unusual approach, in which
                                                                                               we cook the short ribs
      S E RVE S 4                                                                              brieﬂy over high dry heat
                                                                                               instead of for a long time
We’ve enjoyed this dish many times at Jae’s, a Korean restaurant right next                    using slow moist heat, you
                                                                                               need ﬂanken-style ribs,
door to the East Coast Grill, where they do a great job with this preparation.                 which are much thinner
For this dish, you need a special cut, the ﬂanken-style short rib, which can be                than English-style. You will
cut thinner than English-style. This is very important, because if the butcher                 most likely have to go to
                                                                                               the butcher to get these,
cuts the ribs more than three quarters of an inch thick, they will not cook                    since the supermarket will
through before burning on the outside. This meat has some chew to it, but we                   probably only have Eng­
enjoy that. Plus, the typical Korean combination of sweet, hot, and pungent                    lish-style. You may ﬁnd
                                                                                               both chuck and plate short
makes them fantastic.                                                                          ribs in the ﬂanken style, but
      This makes a great lunch served with brown rice and some seared                          not the slightly more ten­
greens with ginger.                                                                            der rib section short ribs.


                                                                                                OTHER NAMES
      FOR THE KIMCHEE
                                                                                               Barbecue ribs, kosher ribs.
      1 ⁄4   cup soy sauce
      1 ⁄4   cup rice vinegar
                                                                                                OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
      1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger                                                         This dish works very well
      1 teaspoon minced garlic                                                                 with any of the very tender
      1 tablespoon minced fresh chile peppers of your choice                                   steaks from the short loin
                                                                                               (New York strip, tenderloin,
      1 tablespoon sugar                                                                       porterhouse, or T-bone),
      1⁄ 2   cup Napa cabbage (Tianjin bok choy), sliced 1 ⁄4 inch thick                       but for economy’s sake, we
      1 cucumber, peeled, seeded, and thinly sliced                                            would recommend a skirt
      1⁄ 2
                                                                                               steak, ﬂank steak, or even
             red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and thinly sliced
                                                                                               a boneless chuck or top
      1 medium carrot, peeled and very thinly sliced                                           round steak here.

      21 ⁄ 2 pounds ﬂanken-style beef short ribs, 1 ⁄ 2 to 3 ⁄4 inch thick

      FOR THE MARINADE
      1⁄ 3   cup soy sauce
      1⁄ 2   cup fresh lime juice (about 4 limes)
      1 tablespoon minced garlic
      2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
      2 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice
      3 tablespoons freshly cracked white pepper (or substitute black pepper)
      1 teaspoon ground coriander




                                                                             B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T         117
                             1. Make the kimchee: In a small bowl, combine the soy sauce, rice
                        vinegar, ginger, garlic, chile peppers, and sugar and whisk together well. In
                        a medium bowl, toss the cabbage, cucumber, red pepper, and carrot
                        together. Add just enough of the dressing to moisten the vegetables and
                        mix well; refrigerate.
                             2. Place the short ribs in a large bowl. Combine all the marinade
                        ingredients in a small bowl and pour the mixture over the short ribs. Cover
                        and refrigerate for at least 1 hour and up to 3 hours.
                                3. Meanwhile, light a ﬁre in your grill.

                              4. Remove the meat from the marinade and pat it dry with paper
                        towels; discard the marinade. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals
                        are very hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the heat source for
                        only 1 to 2 seconds), place the meat on the grill and sear well on one side,
                        about 3 minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the desired doneness,
                        about 3 minutes more for rare. Remove the meat from the grill, cover
                        loosely with foil, and allow to rest for 5 minutes.
                                5. Serve the ribs hot, accompanied by the kimchee.




118   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                       RECIPES FOR
          SMALL TOUGH CUTS OF BEEF

       Orange-and-Chile-Stewed Bottom Round Steaks with       10 STEPS TO GREAT BEEF
                                                              STEWS
                            Butternut Squash and Oregano
                                                               1. Dry the meat cubes.
 Old-Style Chunky Beef and Beer Stew with Onions, Peppers,
                                                               2. Season the meat
    and Tomatoes and Crunchy Parsley–Bread Crumb Shake            cubes generously.

       Beef and Black Bean Stew with Brazilian Flavors and     3. Brown the meat cubes
                                           Fried Plantains        well, in batches if
                                                                  necessary.
K.L.–Style Gingered Beef Stew with Red Onion–Lime Sambal
                                                               4. Remove the meat from
                                                                  the pot, adjust the
     African-Style Beef and Tuber Stew with Toasted Spices
                                                                  amount of fat in the
                                                                  pot, and sauté the
            Old-School Southern-Style Beef Stew with Corn,        aromatics and
                                      Tomatoes, and Bacon         vegetables.

     The World’s Hottest Chili, with Scotch Bonnet Peppers,    5. Deglaze the pot with
                                                                  some of the liquid.
                    Yucca, and a Cucumber-Mango Coolant
                                                               6. Return the meat to the
 Señor Sanchez’s Salvadoran Soup of Kings with Short Ribs,        pot along with enough
                                       Corn, and Plantains        liquid to cover.

       Steak Bomb—Fully Loaded with Mushrooms, Onions,         7. Bring to a simmer and
                                                                  skim off any ﬁlm, then
                                               and Peppers
                                                                  reduce the heat to low
                                                                  and simmer gently.
Aromatic Ginger and Beef Broth with Hoisin and Traditional
                                Southeast Asian Garnishes      8. Check for doneness
                                                                  early and often; just
 Texas-Style Ground Beef Casserole with Sweet Potato Crust        take out a cube of
                                                                  meat and try it.
                                    and A-1 Parsley Butter
                                                               9. Skim any ﬁlm and fat
 Indian-Spiced Beef-Stuffed Red Onions with Fresh Coconut-        from the liquid.
                   Ginger Chutney and Simple Yogurt Sauce
                                                              10. Add any ﬁnal
                                                                  seasonings, season
       Red Wine–Braised Oxtails over Spaghetti with Garlic
                                                                  again to taste with salt
                                               and Spinach        and pepper, and serve.

        Basil-Crusted Meat Loaf with Brandy, Walnuts, and
                                       Spicy Tomato Sauce



                                                                                        119
THE CUT

This steak comes from the
                                 Orange-and-Chile-Stewed Bottom
bottom part of the round,
which is basically the rear
                                 Round Steaks with Butternut
leg of the animal from the
butt down to the shank.          Squash and Oregano
While we usually prefer to
use meat from the chunk                  S E RVE S 4

when stewing, in this case,
the round works better           Here you have what is basically a Swiss steak with Latin American ﬂavors.
because you get a
smoother slab of meat,
                                 You could deﬁnitely braise this cut of beef, but we like the ﬂavor of the liquid
with fewer breaks in it from     so much that we decided the beef should swim in it rather than just wade in
sinews or cartilage. That        it. After spending an hour and a half or so in this situation, this tough cut of
way, you get a more uni­
form steak to cook. You
                                 meat becomes amazingly tender. It’s a really good example of how the proper
can easily ﬁnd this cut in       cooking method can convert what may seem an unpalatable cut of meat into
the supermarket, no spe­         something you want to make again and again.
cial knowledge required.
                                         Serve this over white rice to absorb the ﬂavorful liquid; for another

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                 touch of Latin authenticity, mix the rice with cooked black beans.
You can substitute any                   1⁄ 2   cup coarsely ground cornmeal
steak cut from the round in
this recipe, or a chuck                  2 tablespoons ground cumin
steak if you prefer.                     1 teaspoon kosher salt, plus more to taste
                                         1 teaspoon freshly cracked black pepper, plus more to taste
                                         Four 12-ounce bottom round steaks, about 1 inch thick
                                         1 ⁄4   cup vegetable oil
                                         3 onions, peeled and diced small
                                         1 ⁄4   cup minced garlic
                                         1 tomato, cored and diced small
                                         1 to 2 tablespoons minced canned chipotle chiles in adobo or fresh chile
                                            peppers of your choice
                                         3 cups peeled and cubed butternut squash (or substitute any other hard
                                            winter squash)
                                         About 2 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                         1 cup fresh orange juice (about 2 juice oranges)
                                         2 cinnamon sticks (or 2 teaspoons ground cinnamon)
                                         1⁄ 2   cup chopped fresh oregano


                                      1. In a small bowl, combine the cornmeal, cumin, salt, and pepper
                                 and mix well. Dry the steaks with paper towels, then dredge them in this
                                 mixture, shaking off the excess.
                                       2. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
                                 heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Add




120            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
the steaks and sear well, about 3 minutes per side. Remove the steaks from               COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

the pot and set aside on a platter.                                                     Like all stews, this is fan­
                                                                                        tastic reheated next day.
       3. Drain all but 2 tablespoons of the oil from the pot. Reduce the               Or you can heat it up,
heat to medium, add the onions, and cook, stirring occasionally and scrap­              transfer it to a bun with a
                                                                                        slotted spoon, and have a
ing up any browned bits from the bottom of the pot, until lightly
                                                                                        Mexican-style Sloppy Joe.
browned, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic, tomato, and chiles and cook,                 Try it for a lunch on a cool
stirring, for 1 minute.                                                                 fall day.

      4. Return the steaks to the pot, along with any juices that have accu­
mulated on the platter, then add the squash, stock, orange juice, and cin­
namon. (If the liquid does not cover the ingredients, add enough stock so
that it does.) Bring to a boil and skim any scum off the top of the liquid.
Reduce the heat to low, season with salt and pepper, cover, and cook until
fork-tender, 1 hour and 10 minutes to 11⁄ 2 hours. To check for doneness,
plunge a fork straight down into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If
the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork,
give it more time. When the steaks are done, transfer them to a platter and
cover them loosely with foil.
      5. Skim any fat from the sauce and remove the cinnamon sticks if
you used them. If the sauce is not as thick as you like, place the pot over
high heat and reduce to the desired consistency. Stir in the oregano, season
to taste, and serve the steaks accompanied by liquid.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          121
THE CUT

Chuck is a richly ﬂavorful
                                Old-Style Chunky Beef and Beer
part of the cow, and for
some reason it seems to
                                Stew with Onions, Peppers, and
match up perfectly with
beer. The easiest way to        Tomatoes and Crunchy
get chuck stew meat is to
simply buy any roast or         Parsley–Bread Crumb Shake
steak from the chuck and
cube it up yourself. Chuck              S E RVE S 6 TO 8
arm or shoulder steaks are
good choices; in fact, any­
                                A few winters ago I (Chris) really got into stews, so I spent a lot of time play­
thing with “chuck” in it is
OK, except for the chuck        ing around with different liquids to use in them. I found that beer was actually
mock tender.                    the top contender for the role. So people would see me cooking in the
                                kitchen, drinking beer and dumping beer into everything I was cooking, and
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                they would think it was pretty funny. But it actually works really well. Beer has
If chuck is not available,
you can use top or bottom
                                a lot of body and a lot of ﬂavor, and somehow it works out perfectly as a vehi­
round here.                     cle to soak up other ﬂavors. When you use a dark beer, as we do here, it adds
                                a lot of character.
                                        In some ways, this particular dish is chili without the chili. The crunchy
                                parsley–bread crumb shake adds a nice fresh ﬂavor and texture dynamic
                                right at the end of the cooking. Since the shake contains a good amount of
                                salt and pepper, it’s best to underseason the stew, then add more salt and
                                pepper after the shake if you think it is needed.
                                        Serve this with some buttered crusty bread for dunking into the stew and
                                a crisp Romaine salad with some grated hard cheese and a vinegary dressing.

                                        3 tablespoons vegetable oil, or more if needed
                                        3 pounds boneless beef chuck, such as chuck arm or chuck shoulder
                                           steak, cut into 2-inch cubes
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        2 large onions, peeled and diced small
                                        3 red bell peppers (or a mix of red and green), cored, seeded, and diced
                                           large
                                        3 tablespoons minced garlic
                                        11 ⁄ 2 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                        One 16-ounce can dark beer, or more if needed
                                        2 cups whole canned tomatoes, drained and roughly chopped
                                        1 tablespoon dark brown sugar
                                        2 teaspoons dried thyme
                                        1 bay leaf
                                        2 whole cloves, crushed




122           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      FOR THE SHAKE

      1 cup toasted bread crumbs
      1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
      1 tablespoon minced garlic
      1 tablespoon kosher salt
      2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper


      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Dry
the meat well with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with salt and
pepper. Place it in the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid
crowding, and brown well on all sides, about 10 minutes total; transfer the
pieces to a platter as they are done.
     2. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions and bell peppers and
cook, stirring occasionally, until the onions are translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.
Add the garlic and cook, stirring, for 1 minute.
      3. Return the meat to the pot along with any juices that have accu­
mulated on the platter, then add the stock, beer, tomatoes, brown sugar,
thyme, bay leaf, and cloves and stir well to combine. (If the ingredients are
not completely covered, add enough extra beer to cover them.) Bring to a
simmer over medium heat and skim any scum off the top of the liquid.
Cover the pot, reduce the heat to low, and simmer gently until the meat is
tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours. To check for doneness, take a piece of meat out of
the stew, cut into it to check for color, and taste for tenderness. When the
stew is done, skim off any scum from the top of the liquid.
      4. While the stew is cooking, combine the bread crumb shake ingre­
dients in a small bowl and mix well.
      5. Top each bowl of      stew with a shake of the shake and serve.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   123
THE CUT

See African-Style Beef and
                                 Beef and Black Bean Stew with
Tuber Stew (page 128) for
information about beef
                                 Brazilian Flavors and Fried
chuck cuts to use for stew
beef. In addition to the cuts    Plantains
suggested there, beef
chuck under blade pot                    S E RVE S 6 TO 8

roast or beef chuck eye
roast are also good              Feijoada is a black bean stew that is practically the national dish of Brazil. It
choices.
                                 usually includes not only beef and sausage, but pig’s ears and tongue as
                                 well. This is the WASP version, in which we use only one type of meat, good
                                 stew beef from the chuck. You can certainly get away with using canned
                                 beans here; add them after the meat has been cooking about 1 hour.
                                         As for all stews, don’t be tempted to skip the ﬁnal adjustment of sea­
                                 soning. This can make a huge difference in the taste. In fact, it’s best to add
                                 less salt and pepper than you think you’ll need in the initial stages, then bal­
                                 ance them at the end when the stew is just ready to come off the stove.
                                         Serve this with white rice, a hearts of palm salad, and some juicy
                                 oranges or more exotic fruit, and you’ve got yourself a great tropical dinner.

                                         1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                         2 pounds boneless beef chuck, cut into 1-inch cubes
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         2 large onions, peeled and diced medium
                                         1 ⁄4   cup cumin seeds (or 2 tablespoons ground cumin)
                                         1 ⁄4   cup cracked coriander seeds (or 2 tablespoons ground coriander)
                                         1 ⁄4   cup minced garlic
                                         1 ⁄4   cup minced canned chipotle peppers in adobo, with their sauce
                                         2 cups dried black beans, picked over and rinsed
                                         6 cups water

                                         FOR THE SALSA

                                         2 small red onions, peeled and diced small
                                         1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
                                         1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                         1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
                                         1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                         1 tablespoon red pepper ﬂakes, or to taste
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




124            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      F O R T H E P L A N TA I N S

      2 cups vegetable oil
      3 green plantains, peeled and sliced into rounds about 1 ⁄4 inch thick
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Dry
the beef with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with salt and pepper.
Add the beef to the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid
crowding, and brown well on all sides, about 10 minutes; transfer the
pieces to a platter as they are done.
      2. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed, so you have about
2 tablespoons. Add the onions and cook, stirring occasionally, until
translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the cumin, coriander, garlic, and chipotles
and cook, stirring, for 2 minutes more.
      3. Return the meat to the pot, add the beans and water, and bring to
a simmer. Skim any scum from the surface of the liquid, then reduce the
heat to low, cover, and cook gently until the meat is tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours.
To check for doneness, take a piece of meat out of the stew, cut into it to
check for color, and taste for tenderness. When the meat is done, skim any
scum off the surface, taste the liquid, and adjust the seasoning with salt
and pepper if necessary.
     4. Meanwhile, make the salsa: In a medium bowl, combine all the
ingredients and mix well. Set aside.
      5. Make the plantains: In a small saucepan, heat the oil until very hot
but not smoking. Drop the plantain rounds into the oil 3 at a time and
cook until well browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Remove them from the oil and
drain on paper towels or a brown paper bag. Using a heavy object such as
a small cutting board or sauté pan, mash each fried round down as ﬂat as a
pancake, applying steady pressure. Put the mashed plantain sections back
into the hot oil, 2 or 3 at a time, and cook for 2 minutes or so until the
entire surface is golden brown. Remove, drain on paper towels or a brown
paper bag, and season liberally with salt and pepper.
     6. Serve the stew over rice, passing the fried plantains and the salsa
on the side for dipping.




                                                                           B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   125
THE CUT

We like to use chuck or
                                 K.L.–Style Gingered Beef Stew
even cubes from top sirloin
here, because we’re calling
                                 with Red Onion–Lime Sambal
for relatively large chunks
of meat and we don’t want                S E RVE S 6 TO 8

them to be too terribly
tough. If you can’t ﬁnd          We ate various versions of this rather thick stew many times at the amazing
packages of cubed beef
                                 hawker stalls of Singapore and Malaysia, where you can get top-quality ver­
labeled either “chuck” or
“sirloin,” buy a chuck steak     sions of street food from all over Asia. Our favorite rendition was one from a
or roast and cut it into         stall not far from the Arabian Nights–style train station in Kuala Lumpur, which
cubes yourself. It doesn’t
                                 is why we call this “K.L.-Style.”
take long, and you’ll get
better meat. This is a price-            Although it’s a stew, this is a good dish for a hot summer night, thanks
conscious supermarket            to its many spices. To get the proper ﬂavor dynamic, it’s important that the
item, no particular need to
                                 curry powder be well cooked in the sauté stage. This is a technique often used
go to the butcher.
                                 by Indian cooks, the acknowledged masters of spice cookery. The sambal—
OTHER NAMES                      which is basically a Southeast Asian or East Asian version of the type of ﬂa-
Stew beef.                       vorful relish that is elsewhere called a chutney or a salsa—is simplicity itself to
                                 make, but it adds a giant burst of fresh ﬂavor to the stew.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                         Serve this with rice and a green vegetable such as broccoli or string
Top round is an acceptable
                                 beans.
substitute here.
                                         1⁄ 2   cup all-purpose ﬂour
                                         1 teaspoon cayenne pepper
                                         Pinch of ground cinnamon
                                         Pinch of ground cloves
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         2 pounds beef stew meat (preferably chuck or top sirloin), cut into 2-inch
                                            cubes
                                         1 ⁄4   cup vegetable oil, or more if needed
                                         2 large onions, peeled and thinly sliced
                                         3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                         2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                         1 ⁄4   cup curry powder
                                         2 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice
                                         About 21 ⁄ 2 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                         3 medium sweet potatoes, peeled and cut into large chunks

                                         FOR TH E SAM BAL

                                         1 red onion, peeled and diced small
                                         2 to 4 tablespoons minced chile peppers of your choice, or to taste
                                         1⁄ 3   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)




126            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh mint                                                    COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                                   If you have some of this
                                                                                             stew left, try putting it in a
                                                                                             small baking pan, covering
     1 cup canned unsweetened coconut milk                                                   it with a layer of mashed
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro                                               sweet or white potatoes,
     1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped peanuts, toasted in a dry skillet over medium heat,          and making yourself a kind
            shaken frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes                                of Malaysian shepherd’s
                                                                                             pie. (We never saw any
                                                                                             shepherds when we were
     1. In a small bowl, combine the ﬂour, cayenne, cinnamon, cloves,                        in Malaysia, but the dish
and salt and pepper and mix well. Dry the meat cubes with paper towels,                      tastes great anyway.)
then dredge them in the spiced ﬂour, shaking off any excess.
       2. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or large heavy pot with a lid, heat the
oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Add the meat
in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and brown well
on all sides about 10 minutes; transfer the pieces to a platter as they are
done.
       3. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Reduce the heat to medium, add the
onions, and cook, stirring occasionally, until they just begin to color, 9 to
11 minutes. Add the ginger, garlic, curry powder, and chiles and cook, stir­
ring, for 3 minutes.
      4. Return the meat to the pot, add the stock, and bring to a simmer.
Skim any scum from the surface, then reduce the heat to low, cover, and
cook for 30 minutes. Add the sweet potatoes and, if there is not enough
liquid to cover all the ingredients, enough stock, water, pineapple juice, or
(our favorite) beer to cover. Continue to cook until the meat is tender, 45
minutes to 1 hour more. To check for doneness, take a piece of meat out
of the stew, cut into it to check for color, and taste for tenderness.
      5. While the stew is cooking, make the sambal: In a medium bowl,
combine the onion, chiles, lime juice, and mint and mix well. Season with
salt and pepper.
      6. When the meat is tender, skim any scum from the surface of the
liquid, add the coconut milk, and continue to cook for 1 minute. Remove
from the heat, adjust the seasoning with salt and pepper if needed, and stir
in the cilantro. Garnish with the peanuts and serve, passing the sambal
separately.




                                                                           B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          127
THE CUT

As usual, we like meat
                                African-Style Beef and Tuber
from the chuck section of
the cow best for stew
                                Stew with Toasted Spices
because it has great ﬂavor
and isn’t too tough. If you             S E RVE S 6 TO 8

can’t get stew beef that
you know comes from the         In this country, we are used to pretty straightforward stews. But if you travel
chuck, buy a piece of chuck
                                around the world—particularly in the tropics—you will ﬁnd that stews often fea­
and cube it yourself. For
this stew, we like the chuck    ture a lot of spices. This makes sense to us, since when you make stews, you
blade roast or chuck 7­         are typically working with the more ﬂavorful cuts of beef that can stand up to
bone blade pot roast.
                                the intense ﬂavors of spices. It also makes for very lively eating. This particu­
                                lar dish starts with a deep level of garlic, ginger, and chile peppers, then we
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Cubes of top round, rump,       ﬁnish it off with a toasted spice mixture that adds a whole other ﬂavor dimen­
or even brisket would be        sion.
just ﬁne in this dish.                  We see eating this with some sautéed leafy greens and a big chunk of
                                melon.

                                        2 pounds boneless beef chuck, cut into 2-inch cubes
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        4 slices bacon, diced large
                                        3 large onions, peeled and diced small
                                        3 tablespoons minced garlic
                                        1⁄ 3   cup peeled and roughly chopped fresh ginger
                                        3 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice, or to taste
                                        1 medium tomato, cored and roughly chopped
                                        About 6 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                        1 medium white potato, peeled and cut into 1-inch cubes
                                        1 medium sweet potato, cut into 1-inch cubes
                                        1 pound yucca, peeled and cut into 1-inch cubes (or substitute acorn
                                           squash)
                                        3 tablespoons cumin seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons ground cumin)
                                        1 tablespoon black mustard seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 teaspoons dry mustard)
                                        3 tablespoons coriander seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons ground coriander)


                                       1. Dry the beef with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with salt
                                and pepper. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a
                                lid, sauté the bacon over medium heat until it is crisp and has rendered
                                much of its fat, about 6 minutes. Use tongs or a slotted spoon to transfer
                                the bacon to a medium bowl, leaving the fat in the pot.




128           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      2. Add the beef to the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to           COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

avoid crowding, and cook until well browned on all sides, about 10 min­                 The spices and root veg­
                                                                                        etables in this stew make it
utes; transfer the pieces to the bowl with the bacon as they are done.
                                                                                        a natural for other uses,
     3. Pour off all but 2 tablespoons of the fat from the pot, add the                 because it has such a
                                                                                        dynamic ﬂavor mixture
onions, and cook, stirring occasionally, until they are golden brown, 11 to
                                                                                        going for it. If you have left­
13 minutes. Add the garlic, ginger, chiles, and tomato and cook for 3 min­              overs, drain off the liquid,
utes more, stirring constantly to keep the garlic from burning.                         chop all the solids pretty
                                                                                        small, form them into pat­
       4. Return the beef and bacon to the pot and add the stock and a big              ties, and fry them in a little
pinch each of salt and pepper. (If there is not enough liquid to cover the              butter. The yucca will do
solid ingredients, add enough stock, water, or beer to cover.) Bring to a               the work of holding the
                                                                                        patties together, and they
simmer and skim any scum from the surface, then cover, reduce the heat                  will taste incredible.
to low, and cook very gently for 1 hour. Add the potato, sweet potato, and
yucca and cook until the meat and vegetables are tender, about 45 minutes
more. To check for doneness, take a piece of meat out of the stew, cut into
it to check for color, and taste for tenderness. Skim any scum from the sur­
face of the stew, taste, and add more salt and/or pepper if necessary.
      5. While the stew is cooking, toast the spices in a small heavy sauté
pan over medium heat, shaking frequently, until they darken and become
fragrant, about 2 minutes; be careful not to burn the spices.
     6. Serve the stew steaming hot, strewn with the toasted spices.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T          129
THE CUT

To get 2-inch cubes of
                                 Old-School Southern-Style Beef
chuck, you are going to
have to buy a chuck steak
                                 Stew with Corn, Tomatoes, and
or roast and cut it up your­
self. But that’s ﬁne,            Bacon
because it’s the easiest
way to be sure that you are              S E RVE S 6 TO 8

getting chuck meat rather
than the mixture of anony­       While it is made with beef rather than squirrel, this stew has its roots in that
mous cuts that is often
contained in precut “beef
                                 classic of the American South, Brunswick stew. As usual, we prefer to use
stew meat.” Just about any       chuck because it has more ﬂavor than other cuts often used for stew. Here
portion of the chuck will do.    we cut the meat into large two-inch cubes rather than the smaller cubes often
Chuck eye roasts or steaks
are very nice here, if you
                                 called for in stew recipes. This both keeps the meat somewhat more tender
want to spend a few extra        and makes it a bigger, more dominant presence in the stew.
pennies. Chuck is a super­               Serve this with buttered corn bread and a simple green salad or
market item, no particular
need to go to the butcher.
                                 coleslaw.

                                         6 strips bacon
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                         2 pounds boneless beef stew meat, preferably chuck, cut into 2-inch cubes
Top sirloin or top round are
also good in this dish.                  Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         1 ⁄4   cup all-purpose ﬂour
                                         2 large red onions, peeled and diced medium
                                         3 tablespoons minced garlic
                                         2 cups fresh corn kernels (about 4 ears)
                                         4 plum tomatoes, cored and diced medium
                                         2 large carrots, peeled and diced medium
                                         About 4 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                         1 cup roughly chopped fresh parsley


                                      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
                                 cook the bacon over medium-high heat until crisp, about 6 to 8 minutes.
                                 Remove and drain on paper towels.
                                       2. Pour off all but 3 tablespoons of fat from the pot. Dry the beef
                                 with paper towels, sprinkle generously with salt and pepper, and toss with
                                 the ﬂour. Add the beef to the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary
                                 to avoid crowding, and brown it well on all sides, about 10 minutes; trans­
                                 fer the pieces to a platter as they are done.
                                         3. Meanwhile, coarsely chop the bacon; set it aside.

                                       4. When all the beef has been browned, add the onions to the pot
                                 and cook, stirring occasionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add
                                 the garlic, corn, tomatoes, and carrots and cook, stirring, for 3 minutes.


130            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      5. Return the meat to the pot, add enough stock to cover, and bring
to a simmer, stirring to dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of
the pot. Skim any scum off the top, then cover, reduce the heat to low, and
cook gently until the meat is tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours. To check for doneness,
take a piece of meat out of the stew, cut into it to check for color, and taste
for tenderness. When the meat is tender, skim any scum off the surface,
taste the liquid, and adjust the seasoning with salt and pepper if necessary.
      6.   Serve the stew in bowls, garnished with the parsley and reserved
bacon.




The World’s Hottest Chili, with                                                            THE CUT

                                                                                          Almost any cut from the

Scotch Bonnet Peppers, Yucca,                                                             top or bottom round will
                                                                                          work in this dish, so long
                                                                                          as it is cut into 11 ⁄ 2-inch
and a Cucumber-Mango Coolant                                                              cubes. The best option is
                                                                                          probably the rump roast,
      S E RVE S 6 TO 8                                                                    while the cut to avoid is the
                                                                                          eye round, which is simply
                                                                                          too lean for this approach.
If you are not a total chili-head—if you don’t enjoy feeling sweat running down
                                                                                          We’re in the cheap cuts
your face as your head starts to tingle and your whole body begins to go                  here, so just go to the
numb—don’t go any farther. This is ground that only crazed chili fanatics will            supermarket and pick the
                                                                                          meat up.
want to tread on.
      This is not traditional chili, but a Caribbean variation, with yucca as the
                                                                                           OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
starch, ginger as a dominant ﬂavor, and Scotch bonnet as the fuel. Now,
                                                                                          Chuck is ﬁne here too, but
many people will tell you that the habanero and the Scotch bonnet are the                 it’s probably not worth the
same. I (Chris) disagree. To my taste buds, the Scotch bonnet, which basi­                extra pennies.

cally grows in the Caribbean, has a much more fruity ﬂavor than the basically
Mexican-grown habanero. So if there is a Caribbean market in your town, it
might be worth making a trip there to get the real thing.
      Of course, the recipe is also a total winner even without the chiles, so
you can eliminate them—in which case, if you’re in a hurry, you can forget the
coolant too.
      We like to serve this over plain white rice, accompanied by a really
fresh green vegetable—sautéed broccoli rabe (page 430), for example, or
simple steamed green beans would be nice.




                                                                        B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T         131
                                1 ⁄4   cup olive oil, or more if needed
                                11 ⁄ 2 pounds top or bottom beef round, cut into 11 ⁄ 2-inch cubes
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                2 large red onions, peeled and diced medium
                                2 red bell peppers, cored, seeded, and diced medium
                                3 tablespoons minced garlic
                                3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                2 to 6 tablespoons minced Scotch bonnet or habanero chiles, depending
                                   on your taste for heat (if you don’t really like heat, substitute
                                   2 teaspoons red pepper ﬂakes)
                                1 ⁄4   cup ground cumin
                                1 ⁄4   cup ground coriander
                                1 ⁄4   cup paprika
                                1 tablespoon ground cinnamon
                                2 tablespoons curry powder
                                1 cup canned mango juice (or substitute pineapple juice)
                                1 cup beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                One 12-ounce can beer, or more if needed
                                2 cups yucca, peeled, ﬁbrous core removed, and diced small (about 1 large)
                                   (or substitute potatoes)

                                FOR THE COOLANT

                                3 mangoes, peeled, pitted, and diced medium
                                2 cucumbers, peeled, seeded, and diced medium
                                1⁄ 2   cup fresh lime juice (about 4 limes)
                                1 tablespoon sugar


                                1 cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro


                              1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
                        heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Dry
                        the meat with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with salt and pep­
                        per. Add to the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowd­
                        ing, and cook until well browned on all sides, about 10 minutes; transfer
                        the pieces to a platter as they are done.
                               2. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
                        of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Reduce the heat to medium, add the
                        onions and red peppers, and cook, stirring occasionally, until they just
                        begin to color, 9 to 11 minutes. Add the garlic, ginger, and chiles and cook,
                        stirring constantly, for 2 minutes. Add the remaining spices and cook, stir­
                        ring, for 3 minutes more.
                              3. Return the meat to the pot, then add the mango juice, stock, and
                        beer. (If there is not enough liquid to cover the ingredients, top the stew

132   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
off with some more beer.) Bring to a simmer and skim any scum off the                      COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

top, then cover, reduce the heat to low, and cook for 30 minutes. Add the                 This is a great leftover
                                                                                          stew, but when you put it in
yucca and continue to cook, covered, until the meat and yucca are tender,
                                                                                          the refrigerator, make sure
about 1 hour more. To check for doneness, take a piece of meat out of the                 to put a huge label on it
stew, cut into it, and taste it for tenderness. When the chili is done, skim              saying “For Knuckleheads
off any scum from the top of the liquid and adjust the seasoning with salt                Only” or something like
                                                                                          that; if an unsuspecting
and pepper.
                                                                                          guest eats this, he or she
      4. While the chili is cooking, make the coolant: In a medium bowl,                  will be in some serious
                                                                                          trouble.
combine the mangoes, cucumbers, lime juice, and sugar and toss to com­
bine.
      5. Serve the chili in big bowls over rice, topped with the cilantro,
with the coolant on the side.




Señor Sanchez’s Salvadoran Soup                                                            THE CUT

                                                                                          See Black Pepper—Crusted
                                                                                          Wine-Braised Short Ribs
of Kings with Short Ribs, Corn,                                                           (page 74) for more details
                                                                                          on short ribs and how to
and Plantains                                                                             get what you want when
                                                                                          buying them.
      S E RVE S 6 TO 8

                                                                                           OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
This soup is a tradition at the East Coast Grill. The head day chef, Elmer                You could make this with
Sanchez, has worked there for eight years and runs a dedicated crew of prep               beef shins, veal shanks, or
                                                                                          even lamb shanks.
cooks. It’s a lucky day for his crew when they arrive for work and ﬁnd Elmer
making his sopa del rey. This is not for the customers, but a special lunch for
the prep chefs, and it’s become one of my (Chris’s) favorite meals. It’s a little
effort to eat this—you’ve got the bone-in ribs and the corn on the cob to deal
with—but its rough-and-ready nature appeals to me. It’s a sublime Central
American eating experience, and my very favorite part is the broth.
      Elmer serves this with Latin-Style Black Beans and Rice (page 422), a
bottle of Tabasco sauce, and, if we’re having a good day and we’re on top of
the prep list, a cold beer. I recommend you do just the same.



                                                                        B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T        133
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE                       11 ⁄ 2 pounds English-style beef short ribs, cut into 2-inch lengths
This stew gets better every                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
day that it sits in your refrig­           1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
erator. And since it’s a
dynamic eating experience,                 2 large onions, peeled and thinly sliced
you’re not likely to get tired             3 tablespoons minced garlic
of it.                                     3 tablespoons ground cumin
                                           2 tablespoons chili powder
                                           2 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice
                                           3 green plantains, peeled and each cut into 5 pieces (or substitute yucca,
                                              malanga, taro, or boniato)
                                           2 sweet potatoes, peeled and cut into chunks the same size as the plantain
                                           About 6 cups chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                           3 ears corn, husked and each cut crosswise into 5 pieces
                                           1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
                                           1 large red onion, peeled and diced small
                                           4 limes, quartered


                                         1. Dry the ribs with paper towels and sprinkle them generously with
                                   salt and pepper. In the largest Dutch oven or large heavy pot that you have,
                                   heat the oil over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add only
                                   enough ribs to cover the bottom of the pan in a single layer without touch­
                                   ing and brown well, 10 to 12 minutes per side. Remove and set aside.
                                   Repeat until all the ribs are browned.
                                         2. Pour out all but about 3 tablespoons of fat from the pot. Add the
                                   onions to the pot and cook, stirring occasionally, until just translucent, 7 to
                                   9 minutes. Add the garlic, cumin, chili powder, and chiles and cook, stir­
                                   ring, for 2 minutes. Add the browned ribs, the plantains, and sweet pota­
                                   toes, along with enough stock to cover, bring to a boil, and skim off any
                                   ﬁlm from the top. Reduce the heat to low and simmer, uncovered, for 1
                                   hour.
                                       3. Add the corn and continue to cook until the ribs are tender, 30
                                   minutes to 1 hour more.
                                          4. Season the stew with salt and pepper and stir in the cilantro. Trans­
                                   fer to serving bowls. Sprinkle the red onion over the top and serve with the
                                   lime quarters for squeezing.




134              H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Steak Bomb—Fully Loaded with                                                              THE CUT

                                                                                         Like London broil, shaven

Mushrooms, Onions, and Peppers                                                           steak is not a particular cut
                                                                                         of meat but an approach to
                                                                                         butchering. Basically, the
      S E RVE S 4                                                                        butcher takes meat from
                                                                                         the tougher sections of the
Also known as a grinder, hero, or hoagie, the “bomb” is a classic American               cow such as the round and
                                                                                         shaves it very thin. This
sandwich, a Dagwood-style creation loaded up with whatever strikes the cre­
                                                                                         tenderizes the meat by cut­
ator’s fancy. My (Chris’s) grandmother was particularly fond of this version,            ting the strands of connec­
which features shaved steak, relatively tough but very ﬂavorful beef cut very,           tive tissue, so when you
                                                                                         cook the meat, it seems a
very thin so it is not so chewy.
                                                                                         bit chewy but not tough. It’s
      This is a Sunday afternoon classic, best served in front of the television         a smart way to get all the
with a big bottle of your favorite soda and a bag of chips. If you’re a fan of           ﬂavor out of these tougher
                                                                                         cuts.
Philly cheese steak, grate some Parmesan or Asiago on top of this and you’ll
have an upscale version of your favorite.
                                                                                          OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

                                                                                         Thinly sliced ﬂank steak or
      3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
                                                                                         skirt steak are both deli­
      2 red onions, peeled and thinly sliced                                             cious in this recipe.
      1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and thinly sliced
      1 pound white mushrooms, stemmed and thinly sliced
      1 tablespoon minced garlic
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
      1 pound shaved steak (see The Cut, right)
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar
      1 to 3 teaspoons Tabasco sauce
      2 tablespoons catsup
      4 sub rolls, split and toasted


     1. In a very large sauté pan, heat 1 tablespoon of the oil over
medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onions and red pep­
per and cook, stirring occasionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes.
Transfer the onions and peppers to a medium bowl and set aside.
       2. Add 1 tablespoon of the remaining oil to the pan. When the oil is
very hot, add the mushrooms and cook, stirring occasionally, for 5 minutes.
Add the garlic and cook, stirring, for 1 minute more. Remove from the heat,
stir in the parsley, and add to the bowl of peppers and onions; set aside.
     3. Wipe out the pan with paper towels. Add the remaining 1 table­
spoon oil and heat over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.
Dry the meat with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with salt and
pepper. Add it to the pan, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and


                                                                       B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T         135
                                 cook, stirring, until nicely browned, 2 to 3 minutes. Remove from the
                                 heat, add the vinegar, Tabasco, and catsup, and stir to coat.
                                       4. Divide the steak among the toasted sub rolls, then load them up
                                 with the onions, peppers, and mushrooms and eat.

THE CUT

The round, which is the
                                 Aromatic Ginger and Beef Broth
upper leg of the cow, has
three muscles: top round,
                                 with Hoisin and Traditional
eye round, and bottom
round. All are lean and
                                 Southeast Asian Garnishes
rather tough. Here we are
looking for something from               S E RVE S 4 TO 6 AS AN APPETI Z E R

the top round, which is the
most tender of the three.        This is our version of the fantastic meat broths of Southeast Asia, of which Viet­
Since we only want a small
quantity of meat, the best
                                 namese pho is probably the best known in the United States. We really enjoy the
choice is a top round steak.     ﬂavor dynamics of these soups. Instead of creating broths that have lots of heavy
You could also use the           ﬂavors, the way Western stews often do, Southeast Asian cooks tend to concen­
beef round tip steak, also
known as the top sirloin
                                 trate on making broths that are light and aromatic, almost perfumey. They pour the
steak, which comes from a        broth over the other ingredients, which have been cooked separately. Here we
small section of the round       feature cellophane noodles and strips of sautéed beef round ﬂavored with
that is nearest the sirloin.
                                 sesame and hoisin. What really makes the dish, though, is the platter of garnishes,
                                 or “add-ins,” that you pass around so everyone can add what he or she chooses.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Beef brisket is great here,              This dish seems a little complicated, but it really goes together quickly.
and a small ﬂank steak           It’s a meal all by itself and, as you might expect from its heritage, it’s particu­
would also work well.
                                 larly welcome in hot weather.

BUTCHERSPEAK                             One 11 ⁄4- to 11 ⁄ 2-pound top round steak, about 1 inch thick
Top round is a supermarket               Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
item. If you want to go for
                                         2 tablespoons sesame oil, or more if needed
the authentic Southeast
Asian touch, though, go to               1 large yellow onion, peeled and thinly sliced
your butcher and ask if he               3 tablespoons minced garlic
can cut you a small piece
                                         3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh ginger (unpeeled is OK)
(about 11 ⁄ 2 pounds) off the
tail end of a brisket. Use               4 stalks lemongrass, roughly chopped (or substitute 2 tablespoons grated
                                            lemon zest)
that in the soup and you’ll
think you’re in downtown                 6 cups water
Ho Chi Minh City.                        1 ⁄4   cup ﬁsh sauce (nam pla)
                                         2 plum tomatoes, cored and diced small
                                         2 tablespoons sugar
                                         1 ⁄4   cup cracked coriander seeds (or 2 tablespoons ground coriander)
                                         Freshly cracked white (or black) pepper to taste
                                         1 ⁄4   cup hoisin sauce
                                         4 ounces cellophane noodles, soaked in 4 cups warm water for 1 hour



136            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      FOR THE GARNISHES

      5 scallions (white and green parts), thinly sliced
      1 bunch mint, leaves only
      1⁄ 2   cup fresh cilantro leaves
      1⁄ 3   cup chili paste or 5 fresh chile peppers of your choice, thinly sliced
      4 limes, halved
      1 cup coarsely chopped unsalted roasted peanuts
      1 cup bean sprouts of your choice (optional)


       1. Dry the meat with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with
salt and pepper. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with
a lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.
Place the meat in the pot and brown well on both sides, about 10 minutes
total. (The sesame oil will be very aromatic; don’t worry, it is supposed to
be.) Transfer the meat to a platter.
      2. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total of
about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Heat the oil until hot but not smoking, then
add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.
Add the garlic, ginger, and lemongrass and cook, stirring, for 3 minutes more.
       3. Return the meat to the pot, add the water, ﬁsh sauce, tomatoes,
sugar, and coriander, and bring to a simmer. Skim any scum off the sur­
face, then cover, reduce the heat to low, and simmer gently (a few bubbles
rather than continuous bubbling), occasionally skimming any ﬁlm that
forms on the surface with a large spoon, until the meat is tender, 1 to 11⁄ 2
hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down into the meat
and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides out very easily, the meat is
done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
      4. Meanwhile, preheat the oven to 325°F.

      5. When the meat is done, remove it from the pot and, as soon as it is
cool enough to handle, slice it very thin against the grain. Place in a medium
bowl, season with salt and white pepper, and toss with the hoisin to coat.
Spread the meat on a baking sheet and place in the oven for 15 minutes.
     6. While the meat is in the oven, strain the broth, return it to the pot,
and set over low heat. Skim any scum from the broth, taste, and adjust the
seasoning with salt and pepper if necessary.
     7. Drain the cellophane noodles and divide them evenly among indi­
vidual soup bowls. Ladle the hot broth over the noodles and top with the
meat slices. Arrange the garnishes in bowls or on a large platter and allow
your guests to add what they like.



                                                                                B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   137
THE CUT

We prefer ground chuck for
                                Texas-Style Ground Beef
its combination of great
beef ﬂavor and good value.
                                Casserole with Sweet Potato Crust
For more information,
see About Ground Beef           and A-1 Parsley Butter
(page 140).
                                        S E RVE S 6 TO 8

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Ground round, ground sir­       Here is a famous staff meal from the East Coast Grill, as prepared by chef Owen
loin.                           Tilley. Owen is from Texas, and he claims that his mother used to make this dish
                                for him all the time. Although we’re sure that Texans would say they invented the
                                concept, it’s actually a variation on shepherd’s pie, in which you basically stew up
                                a bunch of lamb, cover it with potatoes, and throw it in the oven. To pep it up a bit,
                                we have added a bit of spice in the form of cumin, coriander, and curry powder,
                                and exchanged sweet potatoes for the white potatoes.
                                        To save time, make the ﬂavored butter ahead of time and freeze it. That
                                way, you can just pull it out, slice as much as you want, and return the rest to
                                the freezer for next time.
                                        Kids love this dish, but it’s sophisticated enough for adult tastes too.
                                Serve it with corn bread, coleslaw, and baked beans.

                                        FOR THE BUTTER
                                        1⁄ 2   pound (2 sticks) unsalted butter, at room temperature
                                        1 ⁄4   cup A-1 sauce
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                        3 large sweet potatoes, peeled and diced large
                                        3 ⁄4   cup half-and-half
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        3 tablespoons olive oil
                                        2 large red onions, peeled and thinly sliced
                                        1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced small
                                        1 green bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced small
                                        2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                        1 tablespoon minced fresh chile peppers of your choice, or to taste
                                        2 tablespoons cumin seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground cumin)
                                        2 tablespoons cracked coriander seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground coriander)
                                        Pinch of ground cinnamon
                                        21 ⁄ 2 pounds ground beef
                                        2 tablespoons molasses
                                        1 ⁄4   cup catsup




138           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Make the butter: In a small bowl, combine the butter, A-1, parsley,             COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

and salt and pepper and mix well. Place on a piece of waxed paper or plas­              This is an excellent dish for
                                                                                        making ahead of time and
tic wrap and roll it into a cylinder, then refrigerate until ﬁrm.
                                                                                        refrigerating, then heating
      2. In a large saucepan, bring 2 quarts of water and a pinch of salt to a          up for 30 minutes at 350°F
                                                                                        just before serving. If you
boil over medium-high heat. Add the sweet potatoes and cook for about 10
                                                                                        have leftover butter, it’s
minutes, or until they are easily pierced by a fork but still offer some resis­         fantastic on steaks or
tance. Drain the potatoes and place them in a medium bowl.                              chops of any description.

       3. Heat the half-and-half in a small saucepan until hot but not quite
simmering, add to the potatoes, and mash until the potatoes are smooth;
the mixture should be fairly loose. Season with salt and pepper and set
aside.
      4. Preheat the oven to 350°F.

      5. In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-high heat until hot
but not smoking. Add the onions and bell peppers and cook, stirring occa­
sionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic, chiles, and
spices and cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Add the ground beef and continue
to cook, stirring, until browned and crumbled, about 10 minutes more.
Drain off the excess fat in the pan and add the molasses, catsup, and salt
and pepper to taste.
     6. Spread the meat mixture in a 2-quart casserole dish. Cover with
the sweet potatoes. Bake until the sweet potatoes are crusty and brown
and the ﬁlling is bubbly, about 40 minutes.
      7. Remove the casserole from the oven. Unwrap the butter and slice
thin, then put one third of it on top of the casserole, letting it melt. Serve
the rest of the butter on the side, for your guests’ discretionary use.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T         139
   ABOUT GROUND BEEF
   As the name implies, ground beef is simply muscle meat (as opposed to offal) that has been ground up or
   chopped very ﬁne in a meat grinder. “Hamburger” is a speciﬁc type of ground meat in that it is allowed by
   federal regulation to contain added fat and/or seasonings. All other ground beef, however, is nothing but
   that: ground-up beef.
       But that doesn’t mean that all ground beef is the same. Not at all. Any particular package has two deﬁn­
   ing characteristics: the part of the cow that it comes from and the percentage of fat that it contains. Unfortu­
   nately, while you can be sure of the second, you can’t always be sure of the ﬁrst.
       Let’s explain. Meat labeled as just plain “ground beef” is made from cheap cuts such as brisket and may
   contain up to 30 percent fat. Next step up the price scale is ground chuck, which has 15 to 20 percent fat, is
   still relatively cheap, and has wonderful beefy ﬂavor. Because of this favorable intersection of taste and cost,
   it is our ﬁrst choice for ground beef. Ground round and ground sirloin, both of which are more expensive, are
   also leaner. Ground sirloin usually has around 15 percent fat, while ground round may have as little as 11
   percent. For our taste, these last two are a bit too expensive and, particularly when it comes to ground
   round, slightly too lean, with a tendency to become dry.
       Unfortunately, though, this is one of those cases where a label can be misleading. The percentage of fat
   in ground beef is checked and enforced at the retail level, so that something labeled “80% lean” ground beef
   can only contain 20 percent fat. But there is no comparable regulation governing labeling of what cut the
   beef comes from. Since few butchers actually segregate meat trimmings, there is no guarantee that some­
   thing labeled “ground chuck” actually all comes from the chuck. All that such a label guarantees is that the
   meat has about 15 to 20 percent fat.
       So, if you really, really care about having the very best ground beef, we recommend the same course of
   action that we advocate for stew beef: Buy a piece of chuck and ask the butcher to grind it for you. But if
   you’re not that fanatical, just look for a package labeled “ground chuck”; at least you know you’re getting the
   right mix of meat and fat.




THE CUT

As with other ground beef
dishes, we prefer using
                                 Indian-Spiced Beef-Stuffed Red
ground chuck here for its
combination of ﬂavor and         Onions with Fresh Coconut-Ginger
value. See About Ground
Beef, above.                     Chutney and Simple Yogurt Sauce
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                  S E RVE S 4

Ground round, ground sir­
loin.                            To our minds, this is among the most dynamic ground beef dishes in the
                                 world. That’s largely because it is inspired by the spice cookery of India,
                                 where just about every home cook is remarkably sophisticated in the myriad
                                 uses of spices. Proper preparation and roasting of the onions are also key to
                                 this dish. Trim off a little bit of the bottom of each one so that it sits ﬂat in the


140           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
pan, then roast them, let them cool for a few minutes, carve out the centers,
stuff with the spicy beef, and roast them again. It’s a little complicated, but
the ﬂavor combinations and the unusual presentation are worth it.
      If you think of it, you can make the chutney up to 3 days ahead, then
cover and refrigerate it, so you have less to do at the last minute.
      Serve this with Crispy Fried Okra (page 429) and a simple salad.


      8 medium red onions (about the size of baseballs), unpeeled

      FOR THE CHUTNEY

      1 cup ﬁnely chopped fresh coconut (or substitute 2 ⁄ 3 cup unsweetened
         dried grated coconut)
      1 ⁄4   cup minced fresh ginger
      1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
      2 tablespoons dark brown sugar
      6 tablespoons fresh lime juice (about 3 limes)
      2 teaspoons red pepper ﬂakes

      F OR TH E SAU CE

      1 cup plain yogurt
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh mint
      1 tablespoon ground cumin

      1 to 2 tablespoons vegetable oil
      1 pound ground beef, preferably chuck
      Kosher salt to taste
      1 small yellow onion, peeled and diced small
      2 teaspoons cumin seeds (or 1 teaspoon ground cumin)
      2 teaspoons coriander seeds (or 1 teaspoon ground coriander)
      5 whole cloves (or 1 teaspoon ground cloves)
      2 tablespoons minced garlic
      2 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice, preferably green
      2 tablespoons curry powder
      Freshly cracked black pepper to taste



      1. Preheat the oven to 350°F. Lightly grease a small roasting pan.

      2. Cut a thin slice off the root end of each onion so that it will stand
upright. Cut off the top one quarter or so of each onion. Place the onions
root side down in the roasting pan and roast until they are tender enough
so you can easily stick a fork all the way into the center, about 45 minutes.
Remove from the oven, leaving the oven on, and set the onions aside to
cool.


                                                                        B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   141
                              3. While the onions are roasting, make the chutney and the sauce:
                        Combine all the chutney ingredients in a small bowl, mix well, and set
                        aside. (If you’re using a fresh coconut, try adding a couple of tablespoons
                        of the water from the inside of the coconut to the chutney.) Combine the
                        yogurt, mint, and cumin in another small bowl, mix well, cover, and refrig­
                        erate until ready to use.
                             4. When the onions are cool enough to handle, remove the skin and
                        any outer layers that have become leathery. Then, one at a time, holding
                        each onion with both hands, gently push the inner layers out from the bot­
                        tom, leaving a shell of 2 or 3 layers. Set aside while you make the ﬁlling.
                              5. In a large sauté pan, heat 1 tablespoon of the oil over medium-high
                        heat until hot but not smoking. Add the ground beef, breaking it up with
                        a fork, and cook, stirring, until just browned, about 8 to 10 minutes. Sea­
                        son with salt and transfer to a medium bowl.
                             6. If there is less than about 2 tablespoons of fat in the pan from the
                        ground beef, add the remaining 1 tablespoon oil and heat until hot but not
                        smoking. Add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until golden
                        brown, 11 to 13 minutes. (If you are using whole spices, use the time while
                        the onion is sautéing to grind the cumin, coriander, and cloves in a spice
                        grinder or coffee grinder or crush in a mortar and pestle.)
                               7. When the meat is browned, add the garlic and chiles and cook, stir­
                        ring, for 1 minute. Add the curry powder, cumin, coriander, and cloves and
                        cook, stirring constantly, for another 2 minutes. Reduce the heat to low,
                        return the meat and any accumulated juices to the pan, season with salt
                        and pepper, and mix very well.
                              8. Arrange the hollowed-out onions in the same roasting pan you
                        used for the initial roasting and heap the hot ﬁlling into the onions,
                        mounding the tops. Place in the oven and roast until hot throughout, 15 to
                        20 minutes. Drizzle generously with the yogurt sauce and serve, passing
                        the chutney and the remaining yogurt sauce on the side.




142   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Red Wine–Braised Oxtails over                                                              THE CUT

                                                                                          Oxtails sometimes actually

Spaghetti with Garlic and Spinach                                                         are the tails of oxen, which
                                                                                          are castrated bulls used for
                                                                                          work such as pulling wag­
      S E RVE S 4 TO 6                                                                    ons. But more often they
                                                                                          are tails of standard beef
Like many traditional pasta sauces from Italy, this one spends a long time                cattle. Our guess is that
                                                                                          they are still called oxtails
cooking. But most of that is unattended oven time, so it’s not really that much
                                                                                          because it just doesn’t
work. And it’s deﬁnitely worth it for the rich, full, deep ﬂavors of the ﬁnished          sound as enticing to say
sauce. It’s a good bet that you’ll end up not only using it on pasta, but doing           that you are serving “cow
                                                                                          tail stew.” In any case, they
as we’ve done and dipping little pieces of crusty bread into it for snacks.
                                                                                          are a prime example of the
      Because the oxtails render quite a lot of fat into the sauce as they cook,          inverse relationship
you may want to make the sauce a day ahead, then refrigerate it overnight;                between ﬂavor and tender­
                                                                                          ness. Full of cartilage, they
much of the fat will rise to the top and congeal, and you can simply skim it off.
                                                                                          need to be cooked for a
Then reheat the sauce, cook the spaghetti, and you’re ready to go.                        very long time to get ten­
                                                                                          der, but once they have
      F OR TH E SAU CE
                                                                                          reached that stage, they
      5 to 6 pounds oxtails                                                               are incredibly ﬂavorful and
      1 ⁄4   cup olive oil                                                                rich. A good butcher will
                                                                                          certainly have this cut, and
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                                                                          you can often ﬁnd it in the
      1 large red onion, peeled and diced small                                           supermarket as well.
      1 medium carrot, peeled and diced small
      2 tablespoons minced garlic                                                          OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

      3 cups beef stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)                                   The dynamic here is taking
                                                                                          a bony piece of meat with
      1 cup dry red wine
                                                                                          lots of cartilage and bring­
      1⁄ 2   cup balsamic vinegar                                                         ing out its ﬂavor. So you
      1 cup canned tomatoes, diced medium (including juice)                               can substitute beef shins,
                                                                                          lamb shanks, or lamb neck
      F O R T H E S PA G H E T T I                                                        for the oxtail with good
      2 tablespoons kosher salt                                                           results.

      1 pound spaghetti


      2 tablespoons olive oil
      1⁄ 2   pound spinach, stemmed, well washed, and dried
      3 tablespoons minced garlic
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh oregano, for garnish
      1 ⁄4   cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese, for garnish


      1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

     2. In a large bowl, combine the oxtails, olive oil, and salt and pepper
and toss to coat. Place the oxtails in a roasting pan large enough to hold


                                                                        B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T        143
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE            them all without touching and roast until they are well browned, about 20
This is an excellent sauce      minutes. Transfer the oxtails to a platter and reduce the oven temperature
to make in advance and
                                to 300°F.
freeze, then pull out and
thaw when you want a                   3. Pour off all but about 2 tablespoons of fat from the roasting pan
sauce with deep, rich beef
                                and place it over two burners on medium-high heat. Add the onion and
ﬂavor in very little time.
                                carrot to the pan and sauté, stirring occasionally, until the onion is golden
                                brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic and continue to sauté, stirring, for
                                1 minute. Add the stock, wine, and vinegar and bring to a simmer, stirring
                                to dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan. Add the toma­
                                toes and oxtails, season with salt and pepper, and cover with a tight-ﬁtting
                                lid or heavy-duty aluminum foil.
                                     4. Place in the oven and cook until the oxtails are very tender and
                                almost falling off the bone, 2 to 3 hours.
                                       5. When the oxtails are done, transfer them to a platter and skim the
                                fat from the braising liquid. Taste the liquid and reduce it if necessary to
                                give it more ﬂavor. For a thicker sauce, reduce it until it coats the back of a
                                spoon.
                                      6. As soon as the oxtails are cool enough, remove the meat from the
                                bones and add it to the sauce in the roasting pan. At this point, you can
                                either refrigerate the sauce for several hours or overnight, skim off the
                                congealed fat, and then reheat it, or you can skim the fat from the top of
                                the sauce again and simply keep it warm while you prepare the spaghetti
                                and spinach.
                                     7. Bring 4 quarts water and the salt to a boil in a large pot. Add the
                                spaghetti and cook until tender but not mushy, 8 to 10 minutes. Drain and
                                keep warm.
                                      8. While the spaghetti is cooking, heat the olive oil in a large sauté
                                pan over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the spinach
                                and sear, tossing madly, for 1 minute. Add the garlic and toss to combine.
                                Remove the pan from the heat, add the hot pasta, season with salt and pep­
                                per, and toss well.
                                     9. Divide the spaghetti and spinach among large pasta bowls. Top
                                each with the oxtail sauce and garnish with the oregano and cheese.




144           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Basil-Crusted Meat Loaf with                                                                     THE CUT

                                                                                                As with other ground beef

Brandy, Walnuts, and Spicy                                                                      dishes, we prefer using
                                                                                                ground chuck here for its

Tomato Sauce                                                                                    combination of value and
                                                                                                ﬂavor. See About Ground
                                                                                                Beef (page 140) for more
      S E RVE S 4 TO 6                                                                          information.


Any meat loaf worth the name should reward the cook with great sandwich                          OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

material, and this one is no exception. Spread a little tomato sauce on the                     Ground round, ground sir-
                                                                                                loin.
bread of your choice and run it under the broiler, then load the toasted bread
up with sliced meat loaf and shredded iceberg lettuce and dig in. This partic­
ular meat loaf is also wonderful when eaten cold or at room temperature, so
it’s perfect for picnics.

      FOR THE CRUST

      1 bunch basil, leaves only, roughly chopped
      3 tablespoons olive oil
      4 garlic cloves, peeled
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      2 pounds ground beef, preferably chuck
      2 teaspoons minced garlic
      1 small onion, peeled and grated
      1⁄ 2   cup walnuts, toasted in a skillet over medium heat, shaking frequently,
             until aromatic, about 3 minutes, and coarsely chopped
      1⁄ 2   cup prunes, pitted and roughly chopped
      2 large eggs
      1 cup fresh bread crumbs
      1 ⁄4   cup brandy
      1⁄ 2   teaspoon ground allspice
      2 tablespoons kosher salt
      1 tablespoon freshly cracked black pepper

      F OR TH E SAU CE
      1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
      2 medium onions, peeled and diced small
      2 tablespoons minced garlic
      1 tablespoon ground coriander
      1⁄ 2   teaspoon ground cinnamon
      2 teaspoons red pepper ﬂakes, or to taste
      1 cup dry red wine




                                                                              B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T      145
                                2 cups canned crushed Italian tomatoes (with their juice)
                                1 bay leaf
                                1 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese, for garnish


                                1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.

                              2. Make the crust: With the food processor running, feed the basil,
                        olive oil, garlic, and salt and pepper through the feed tube in that order.
                        Process until everything just comes together to form a paste; do not
                        overblend. Transfer to a small bowl, cover with plastic wrap pressed
                        directly against the surface, and set aside.
                              3. In a large bowl, combine the ground beef, garlic, onion, walnuts,
                        prunes, eggs, bread crumbs, brandy, allspice, salt, and pepper. Mix well and
                        shape into a loaf in a shallow baking dish. Spread the basil paste evenly
                        over the meat.
                             4. Bake until the juices run clear when you poke a knife into the loaf,
                        about 1 hour.
                              5. While the meat loaf is baking, make the sauce: In a large sauté
                        pan, heat the oil over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add
                        the onions and cook, stirring occasionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13
                        minutes. Add the garlic, coriander, cinnamon, and red pepper ﬂakes and
                        cook, stirring, for 2 minutes more. Pour in the wine, stir once or twice,
                        and simmer gently for 4 minutes. Add the tomatoes and bay leaf and sim­
                        mer, stirring frequently, until the sauce has thickened to your liking, about
                        45 minutes for a medium-thick sauce.
                            6. Cut the meat loaf into thick slabs and serve topped with the
                        tomato sauce and Parmesan cheese.




146   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                       RECIPES FOR
        BEEF ODD CUTS: OFFAL ET AL.

       Corned Beef and Sweet Potato Hash with Red Wine–
                                      Caramelized Onions

       You Gotta Have (Grilled Beef) Heart, Peruvian-Style

                               Hangover-Style Tripe Stew

                             Marrow Hobo Packs on Toast

Grilled Beef Liver and Slab Bacon Kebab on Cornmeal Mush
                         with Smoky Tomato-Bacon Relish

   A Severe Tongue Hashing with Turnips and Swiss Chard

                                     Head Cheese Reuben




                                                             147
THE CUT

Corned beef is basically
                                 Corned Beef and Sweet Potato
beef that has been cured in
a seasoned salt brine.
                                 Hash with Red Wine–Caramelized
Originally this was done for
preservation, but now it is      Onions
done for ﬂavor, which
means the cured meat has                 S E RVE S 4 TO 5

to be cooked. The term
“corned” derives from the        If you are one of those people who has always found traditional corned beef
fact that in the sixteenth
century, the English word
                                 hash to be delicious but too salty, try this version; the sweet potatoes have a
corn referred to any small       way of countering the saltiness of the corned beef. Since hash is basically a
particles, including the         creative use of leftovers, this dish starts out with two items that have already
grains of salt that were
used in preserving beef.
                                 been cooked, the corned beef and the sweet potatoes. If you don’t feel like
Brisket is the cut most          cooking the corned beef, you can use canned, which is really pretty good.
often corned, although cuts      You can also make the onions ahead of time–in fact, you may want to make a
from the round are also
sometimes used. Brisket is
                                 double recipe, since they are fantastic on sandwiches or crostini or served
a better bet, since it is        with grilled meats.
more ﬂavorful.                           This hash makes a great brunch dish for company or a simple supper
                                 dish for the family. Do not rush its cooking: It needs some time in the skillet to
BUTCHERSPEAK
                                 develop its crust.
Corned beef brisket is
available in many super­
                                         11 ⁄ 2 pounds corned beef (or substitute about 5 cups canned corned beef)
markets, but butcher shops
are likely to have the best              2 large sweet potatoes
quality. Also, commercial
                                         FOR THE ONIONS
packaged corned beef
                                         1⁄ 3   cup olive oil
makes no distinction
between the two cuts of                  3 medium red onions, peeled, halved, and very thinly sliced
brisket; at the butcher                  1⁄ 2   cup sugar
shop, you can ask for
corned beef from the ﬂat                 1 cup dry red wine
cut, which is less fatty than            1⁄ 2   cup balsamic vinegar
the point cut.
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         1⁄ 2   cup currants (or substitute 1 ⁄4 cup dark raisins)


                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         2 tablespoons olive oil


                                       1. If using fresh corned beef, do the advance prep: Place the corned
                                 beef in a large pot, add water to cover, and bring to a boil, then reduce the
                                 heat to low and cook at a bare simmer until a sharp knife will pass all the
                                 way through without much resistance, about 21⁄ 2 hours. Drain well, then,
                                 as soon as the meat is cool enough to handle, chop it ﬁne. Set aside.




148            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
       2. Meanwhile, preheat the oven to 350°F. Pierce the sweet potatoes
in a few places with a fork and bake until just tender, about 50 minutes. As
soon as they are cool enough to handle, peel and dice small. Set aside.
      3. Make the onions: In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-
high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onions, sugar, wine, and
vinegar and cook, stirring occasionally, until most of the liquid has evapo­
rated and the onions are golden brown, 30 to 40 minutes. Season well with
salt and pepper, stir in the currants, and set aside.
      4. In a large bowl, combine the corned beef, sweet potatoes, and salt
and pepper (use plenty). In a large sauté pan, heat the olive oil over
medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Add the meat mixture,
spreading it out to cover the entire bottom of the pan. Press the hash
down evenly with a large metal spatula, reduce the heat to medium, cover
the pan, and let the hash cook undisturbed for 15 minutes. Uncover the
pan, turn the hash over in sections with the spatula, and raise the heat to
high. Cook for 5 more minutes, turning the hash every once in a while
with the spatula.
      5. Serve the hash hot, covering each portion with a generous layer of
the caramelized onions.




You Gotta Have (Grilled Beef )                                                          THE CUT

                                                                                       While not often used in the

Heart, Peruvian-Style                                                                  United States, beef heart is
                                                                                       popular in many other
                                                                                       countries, particularly Peru,
      S E RVE S 6 TO 8 AS AN APPETI Z E R                                              because it is very cheap
                                                                                       but cooks up nicely. We
This may seem strange, but beef heart is a classic Peruvian street food, usu­          have seldom seen this in a
                                                                                       supermarket; you are prob­
ally eaten with grilled corn and boiled sweet potatoes. It’s not as if you’re          ably going to have to go to
actually going to sit down to a big heart; the meat is cut into cubes and              a quality butcher for it.
grilled, then tossed with a simple spicy vinaigrette-style dressing. It has a
good, slightly liver-like ﬂavor and plenty of chew.                                     OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

                                                                                       Any relatively tough cut of
      This is a good appetizer to serve before a vegetable entrée or a simple
                                                                                       beef will work ﬁne in this
grilled ﬁsh.                                                                           recipe. Top and bottom
                                                                                       round, for example, make
                                                                                       very good substitutes.



                                                                     B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T         149
                                1 small beef heart, about 2 pounds
                                1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                1 tablespoon ground cumin
                                1 to 3 teaspoons red pepper ﬂakes
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                FOR THE DRESSING
                                1 ⁄4   cup red wine vinegar
                                1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                1 to 3 teaspoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice
                                1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)


                                1. Build a ﬁre in your grill.

                             2. Trim any fat from the beef heart, dry the meat with paper towels,
                        and cut it into 1-inch cubes. In a small bowl, combine the oil, garlic,
                        cumin, red pepper ﬂakes, and salt and pepper and mix well. Add the meat
                        and toss to coat well.
                              3. Thread the meat onto skewers. When the ﬁre has died down and
                        the coals are very hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill sur­
                        face for 1 second), place the skewers on the grill and sear well on one side,
                        about 4 minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the desired doneness,
                        about 6 minutes total for rare. To check for doneness, make a 1⁄4-inch cut in
                        the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less done than you like
                        it. Remove the meat from the grill and allow to rest for 5 minutes while
                        you make the dressing.
                              4. In a medium bowl, whisk the vinegar, oil, chiles, parsley, lemon
                        juice, and salt and pepper to taste together well. Slide the meat off the
                        skewers and toss with the dressing before serving.




150   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Hangover-Style Tripe Stew                                                                        THE CUT

                                                                                                Tripe is stomach lining,
                                                                                                which makes it sound less
      S E RVE S 8
                                                                                                tasty than it actually is.
                                                                                                There are three types of
Although it is not to everybody’s taste, we love tripe. It not only has some real               tripe, but by far the most
ﬂavor, it also is rich in vitamin B, which is suggested as a cure for a hangover.               ﬂavorful and tender is hon­
                                                                                                eycomb tripe, the inner
Tripe is also a bedrock food of the people in many parts of the world, one of                   side of which has a honey­
those cast-off parts of the animal that cooks who couldn’t afford the more                      comb pattern. You can ﬁnd
desirable cuts have managed to turn into something very tasty. Of course,                       honeycomb tripe in most
                                                                                                supermarkets, although, as
dealing with tripe takes some time, so you should do much of the prep work                      with most offal, a quality
for this dish the day before you plan to have that hangover.                                    butcher is likely to have the
      Serve this brothy soup, a variation on Mexican menudo, with corn                          freshest. Even “fresh” tripe
                                                                                                is actually partially cooked.
bread and the hair of whatever dog bit you.
                                                                                                 OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
      1 cup kosher salt
                                                                                                Are you kidding? What
      1 cup white vinegar
                                                                                                could you substitute for a
      2 pounds honeycomb tripe                                                                  stomach lining?
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      1 ⁄4   cup peanut or vegetable oil
      3 large onions, peeled and diced small
      2 tablespoons dried oregano
      3 tablespoons minced garlic
      2 quarts chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      1 small ham hock, about 8 to 10 ounces
      One 16-ounce can hominy
      1 ⁄4   cup ﬁnely chopped fresh chile peppers of your choice

      FOR THE GARNISH

      8 limes, halved
      1 cup fresh cilantro leaves
      1 cup shredded green cabbage
      1 medium red onion, peeled and diced small
      1 ⁄4   cup cumin seeds, toasted in a skillet over medium heat, shaken
             frequently, until fragrant, about 2 minutes


      1. Prepare the tripe: Mix the salt and vinegar together well. Pour one
third of the mixture into a large bowl and scrub the tripe in the mixture
vigorously for 5 minutes with a clean brush, as if laundering a dirty shirt.
Rinse in cold water and repeat two more times. Place the tripe in a bowl of
cold water to cover, cover the bowl, and refrigerate for at least 12 hours
and up to 36 hours, changing the water once or twice.




                                                                              B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T         151
                              2. Remove the tripe from the water and place it in a large pot with
                        fresh water to cover. Bring it to a boil and simmer for 1 hour. Drain well.
                                3. Light a very low ﬁre in your grill.

                               4. Sprinkle the tripe with salt and pepper. When the ﬁre dies down
                        (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for about 6 sec­
                        onds), place the tripe on the grill and cook for 10 to 15 minutes, or until
                        the exterior is an even crusty golden brown. Remove the tripe from the
                        grill and, as soon as it is cool enough to handle comfortably, slice very thin
                        and set aside.
                              5. Make the stew: In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or large heavy pot,
                        heat the oil over medium-high heat until it is very hot but not smoking.
                        Add the onions and cook, stirring frequently, until translucent, 7 to 9 min­
                        utes. Add the oregano and garlic and cook, stirring, for 2 minutes. Add the
                        chicken stock and bring to a simmer, then add the ham hock, hominy, and
                        grilled tripe. Reduce the heat to low and simmer, uncovered, for 2 hours.
                              6. Just before serving, stir in the chile peppers. Squeeze the juice of
                        half a lime into each individual bowl of tripe. Garnish with the remaining
                        lime halves, the cilantro, cabbage, onion, and cumin seeds.




152   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Marrow Hobo Packs on Toast                                                                  THE CUT

                                                                                           Marrow bones are the shin
                                                                                           bones of the steer, which
      S E RVE S 4 AS AN APPETI Z E R
                                                                                           are large enough to have
                                                                                           substantial marrow in the
We love fat, and marrow is very fatty. But it is also very light and digestible,           center. Marrow has long
not qualities you usually associate with fat. This is one of my (Chris’s) favorite         been considered a delicacy
                                                                                           in Europe, and it is now
items to serve when I have a bunch of chefs over to the house, because chefs               gaining some acceptance
are always big fat eaters. It couldn’t be easier to do, either. You just salt and          in the United States due
pepper the bones, wrap them up in foil, and cook them in the oven or in the                to the recent popularity
                                                                                           of osso buco, braised
coals of a charcoal ﬁre, then knock the marrow out onto toast. Now, that’s                 veal shanks that contain
some good eating.                                                                          marrow.
      Try serving these as an appetizer in front of an entrée salad.
                                                                                            OTHER NAMES
      Eight 2- to 3-inch-long beef shin bones                                              Clear bones.
      3 tablespoons olive oil
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                                 BUTCHERSPEAK

      1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley                                             You can sometimes ﬁnd
                                                                                           marrow bones in the
      12 slices French bread, toasted
                                                                                           supermarket, but be sure
                                                                                           that you don’t get regular
      1. Preheat the oven to 400°F, or build a ﬁre in your charcoal grill.                 “soup bones” instead; they
                                                                                           don’t have enough marrow
      2. In a large bowl, toss the marrow bones with the oil and salt and                  in them for this approach.
pepper so that they are thoroughly coated. Tear off eight sheets of heavy-                 Tell the butcher that you
                                                                                           want shin bones, rather
duty foil, each about 2 feet long, and stack them one on top of the other.                 than knuckle bones.
Arrange half the bones in the center of the top sheet. Fold up the top four
of the sheets of foil around the bones, one after the other, turning the
package one quarter turn between each sheet and making sure that each
sheet is well sealed. Repeat this process with the remaining bones.
      3. Cook the hobo packs in the oven for 35 to 45 minutes. Or when
the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you can hold your
hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 2 to 3 seconds), place the packs on
the bottom of the grill, pile the coals up on all sides of them, and cook for
40 to 50 minutes, depending upon the intensity of the coals. The marrow
should be soft throughout.
      4. Remove the bones from the foil and sprinkle them with the pars­
ley and more salt and pepper. Serve with long spoons for scooping the
marrow out onto the toasted French bread.




                                                                         B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T      153
THE CUT

Beef liver, which can be
                                 Grilled Beef Liver and Slab Bacon
distinguished from calf’s
liver by its reddish-brown
                                 Kebab on Cornmeal Mush with
color, is very dense, rich,
and a bit tough.                 Smoky Tomato-Bacon Relish
                                         S E RVE S 4
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Calf’s liver is, of course,
ﬁne here. Just cook it for       There was a period in my (Doc’s) youth when, on the advice of a nutritionist,
slightly less time. This         my mother would get up every morning and cook herself liver for breakfast. It
kebab is also excellent
                                 probably was very good for her health, but waking up every day to that smell
when made with any ten­
der cut of beef; try tender­     put me off liver for a long time. Over the past few years, though, I have come
loin tips or sirloin tips in     to like its dense texture and its rich ﬂavor.
place of the liver.
                                         In fact, despite its bad reputation, liver can be really delicious if cooked
                                 right and served with the right complementary ingredients. Here’s a perfect
                                 example. The straightforward corn ﬂavor of the mush and the very smoky, rich
                                 taste of the relish are perfect accompaniments to the liver, and since we’re
                                 grilling the meat, it does not get overcooked, which liver so often is.
                                         With a simple green salad, this is a meal in itself. Of course, you can
                                 also go ahead and serve the kebabs very simply, without the mush or the rel­
                                 ish. But in that case, make the relish another time, because it is very versatile
                                 and very delicious.

                                         FOR THE RELISH

                                         4 large garlic cloves, unpeeled
                                         1 large red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and halved
                                         6 ripe plum tomatoes, cored
                                         2 small red onions, peeled and halved
                                         2 tablespoons minced canned chipotle peppers in adobo
                                         1⁄ 2   cup olive oil
                                         3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         2 to 3 tablespoons fresh lime juice (1 to 2 limes)
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                         8 ounces slab bacon (or substitute sliced bacon)

                                         One 2-pound piece beef liver, peeled, cleaned, and cut into twenty 11 ⁄ 2-inch
                                           cubes
                                         1 ⁄4   cup olive oil

                                         FOR THE CORNMEAL MUSH

                                         4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter
                                         1 small yellow onion, peeled and diced small




154            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     4 cups chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
     1 cup yellow cornmeal
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


     1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

      2. Double-wrap the garlic cloves in heavy-duty aluminum foil. When
the ﬁre dies down and the coals are medium-hot (you can hold your hand
5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds), place the garlic package
in the coals to roast for 15 minutes. Place the red pepper, tomatoes, and
onions on the grill grid and cook the pepper and tomatoes, turning occa­
sionally, until the skins are charred on all sides, 5 to 6 minutes; remove
them from the grill and place them in a paper bag to cool. Leave the
onions on the grill and cook, turning occasionally, until they are tender all
the way through, about 10 minutes. Remove from the grill.
      3. When they are cool enough to handle, coarsely chop the onions
and place them in a medium bowl. Pull the skins off the tomatoes,
coarsely chop them, and add them to the bowl with the onions. Unwrap
the garlic and squeeze the cloves out of their skins into a food processor.
Remove the skin from the bell pepper, add to the food processor, along
with the chipotles, and process until ﬁnely chopped. With the machine
running, slowly add the olive oil. Process until smooth, stopping to scrape
down the sides of the work bowl. Scrape the pepper paste into the tomato
and onion mixture, then stir in the parsley, lime juice, and salt and pepper.
Set aside.
       4. In a small sauté pan, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until
it is cooked through but not crisp, about 5 minutes. Drain on paper towels
or a brown paper bag, then cut into twenty 1-inch pieces.
      5. Dry the liver pieces with paper towels and thread them alternately
with the bacon onto four long skewers, using 4 pieces of liver and 5 pieces
of bacon on each. Brush lightly with olive oil, then set aside while you
make the mush.
      6. Melt the butter in a medium sauté pan over medium-high heat.
Add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13
minutes. Pour in the chicken stock, then whisk in the cornmeal. Bring the
mixture to a simmer, whisking to breaking up any lumps, then reduce the
heat to low and cook, stirring often, until the mush is thick and creamy
without any lumps—this may take from 10 to 30 minutes. Season with salt
and pepper. Cover and keep the mush warm off the heat while you grill
the skewers.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   155
                                       7. Beef up the ﬁre so it’s very hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches
                                 above the grill surface for 1 second). Season the skewers with salt and pep­
                                 per and grill until well seared on one side, about 4 minutes. Turn and con­
                                 tinue cooking to the desired doneness, about 6 minutes total cooking time
                                 for rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in
                                 the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less done than you like it.
                                        8. To serve, scoop some cornmeal mush onto each plate (thin it with
                                 a little hot water if it seems too thick), then top with a kebab and a hefty
                                 spoonful of relish.




THE CUT

Most people are familiar
                                 A Severe Tongue Hashing with
with beef tongue, if only
from deli sandwiches.
                                 Turnips and Swiss Chard
Tongues of veal, lamb, and
pork are also cooked in                  S E RVE S 6

many places around the
world. Dense and meaty,          Okay, so you might not think the pun is so funny, but it has a purpose—we’re
tongue actually has a ten­
                                 trying to get your attention so you will try this dish, even if you’re not a big fan
der, silken texture after
long, slow cooking in water.     of tongue. When you think about it, tongue is really no weirder than many
It’s a very good way to get      other parts of the animal. Well, maybe you don’t want to think about it.
delicious beefy ﬂavor for
                                 Instead, just go to the market, get some fresh tongue, and make this hash. It
little money. If you have a
deli near you, they may          has plenty of earthy ﬂavors to match the beef, and once you have tried it,
well sell tongue by the          we’re pretty sure you will feel differently about tongue, unless you liked it to
pound. Otherwise, this is
                                 begin with.
another cut you are going
to have to request from                  Serve this with crusty bread and a salad of mixed greens, and you’ve
your butcher.                    got a wonderful Sunday supper for a cold winter night.

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                   2 pounds fresh beef tongue, trimmed of the fatty meat at its base
This hash is a fantastic use             1 large onion, peeled and diced large
for any leftover beef from
                                         2 bay leaves
braises or roasts. Just start
with Step 2 and simply add               2 whole cloves
cubed beef to the mix                    1 teaspoon black peppercorns
rather than sautéing it as               3 tablespoons unsalted butter
you would the tongue.
                                         2 medium onions, peeled and diced small
                                         1 pound white turnips, diced large, blanched in boiling salted water until
                                            fork-tender (about 15 minutes), and drained
                                         2 tablespoons olive oil
                                         1 pound red chard leaves, cleaned and roughly chopped
                                         1 tablespoon minced garlic



156            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1 ⁄4   cup lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
     1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
     Kosker salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     1⁄ 2   cup dried bread crumbs
     4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter, melted


      1. Place the tongue, onion, bay leaves, cloves, and peppercorns in a 5­
inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot, add water to cover, and
bring to a simmer over high heat. Reduce the heat to low and simmer gen­
tly until the meat is fork-tender, about 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours, periodically skim­
ming off any fat that rises to the surface. To check for doneness, plunge a
fork straight down into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork
slides out easily, the meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it
more time. Set the cooked tongue aside to cool slightly.
     2. Preheat the oven to 350°F.

     3. When the tongue is cool enough to handle, peel it and dice the
meat into 1⁄ 2-inch cubes.
      4. In a large sauté pan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the
onions and cook, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.
Transfer to a really large bowl. Add the blanched turnips to the sauté pan
and cook, stirring occasionally, until heated through, about 4 minutes. Add
the turnips to the bowl with the onions.
      5. Return the sauté pan to the stovetop over medium-high heat, add
the olive oil, and heat until hot but not smoking. Add the diced tongue and
cook, stirring frequently, until lightly browned, about 6 to 8 minutes.
Remove the tongue from the pan and add it to the bowl. Add the chard to
the pan and cook until it is wilted and tender, about 3 minutes. Add the
chard to the bowl, along with the garlic, lemon juice, parsley, and salt and
pepper, and mix well.
      6. Turn the hash into a buttered casserole dish. Toss the bread
crumbs with the melted butter and sprinkle over the top of the hash. Bake
for 15 minutes to blend the ﬂavors. Serve hot.




                                                                      B E E F : A M E R I C A’ S M E A T   157
THE CUT

Head cheese is an excel­
                                 Head Cheese Reuben
lent cold cut despite its
                                          S E RVE S 4
rather unfortunate name. It
has nothing to do with
cheese. Instead, it is a kind    Our friends Ihsan and Valerie Gurdal, proprietors of Formaggio Kitchen in
of beef sausage made             Cambridge, Massachusetts, are adventurous eaters who know a tremendous
from bits of meat taken
from the head of a cow or        amount about food. They feature this sandwich, which is an excellent way to
calf, cooked in beef broth,      eat head cheese, at their store. This is a deli meat that we particularly admire
put into a mold, cooled,         because it uses parts of the animal that might otherwise be thrown out and is
and thinly sliced. Pick it up
at the deli counter.             quite tasty. Don’t be put off by the name; if it helps, just think of it as beef pâté
                                 or sausage, which is what it actually is.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                    Instead of using prepared Russian dressing, it’s easy to make your
Cooked corned beef is the        own. Combine equal parts ketchup and mayonnaise, a spoonful of minced
traditional meat here, so of
                                 sweet pickles, a dash of Worcestershire sauce, and fresh lemon juice to
course it makes a good
substitute for head cheese.      taste.
Or try using pastrami or                  Serve this sandwich with napkins and a good stout or porter.
thinly sliced roast beef.
                                          4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter, at room temperature
                                          8 slices light rye bread
                                          1 pound head cheese, cut into 4 thick slices
                                          1⁄ 3   cup prepared or homemade Russian dressing
                                          8 large, thin slices Gruyère or other Swiss cheese
                                          One 8-ounce can sauerkraut, drained, refreshed under cold water, and
                                            drained again


                                          1. Spread the butter over one side of     each slice of bread.
                                       2. Heat a large cast-iron skillet or heavy sauté pan over medium-high
                                 heat until quite hot. Add the head cheese, 1 slice at a time, and sear on
                                 both sides for about 1 minute, then transfer to a platter and cover with foil
                                 to keep warm.
                                       3. Place 4 slices of the bread in the pan, buttered side down, and top
                                 each slice with a spoonful of dressing and 2 slices of cheese, followed by a
                                 generous amount of sauerkraut and then a slice of the seared head cheese.
                                 Add a bit more dressing if desired and top with the remaining 4 slices of
                                 bread, buttered side up.
                                       4. When the bottom slices of bread are golden brown, 4 to 5 min­
                                 utes, carefully turn the sandwiches over, using a large metal spatula. Cover
                                 the pan and cook over medium-low heat until the second slices of bread
                                 are golden brown, the cheese has melted, and the Reubens are heated
                                 through, 4 to 5 minutes. Remove from the pan and serve hot.



158            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                                             VEAL:
                                   GU E S S W H O ’ S
                              COMING to D I N N E R ?



V   eal can be a tough hombre for the home cook. By that, we don’t

mean that it’s tough to cut or chew. Just the opposite. Veal, which is

the meat of young calves, is the most tender of all red meats.
       What we do mean is that veal can be tough to ﬁnd, and pricey as well. Many cuts are
available only in butcher shops, and some are difﬁcult to locate outside of restaurants,
period. But we’ve also found that, if you’re willing to spend a little effort getting your hands
on the various cuts of veal, you’ll discover that it is a versatile and very tasty meat. Plus it
has the advantage that people really don’t expect you to serve it to them at home. In other
words, it’s so “out” that it’s actually cool.
       That’s not to say that veal’s grandiose reputation comes out of nowhere. This ten­
der, delicate meat has occupied a rareﬁed culinary position for thousands of years. It was
popular among the wealthy nobles of ancient Sumeria and Babylonia, and feasting on an
orphaned calf was considered the ultimate extravagance among the early nomadic tribes of
Central Asia. In Biblical times, the image of killing and eating a “fatted calf ” (read “veal”)
conveyed an air of luxurious indulgence meant to mark a momentous occasion.
       But when it comes to veal enthusiasm, no one can match the ancient Romans, who
had a tendency to take all things culinary just a bit too far. Around the third century B.C.,
Roman epicures became so inordinately fond of eating veal that the emperor himself had
to issue an edict forbidding the practice to avoid the depletion of the empire’s herds.

                                                                                                   159
               Although the demand for veal never reached such near-hysterical heights again, this
      tender meat has continued to be popular throughout Europe. In the United States, on the
      other hand, veal was all but nonexistent until about forty years ago. While European farm­
      ers were pampering male calves of dairy cattle, feeding them on milk and then eggs until
      they were two or three months old and then slaughtering them for their pale, delicate meat,
      American dairy farmers were taking a different path. In this country male calves were con­
      sidered nothing but a liability, since they would never grow up to give milk. So they were
      usually slaughtered not long after birth. The meat from these calves, known as “bob veal,”
      was so tasteless and uninteresting that there was little demand for it.
               This situation changed in the early 1960s, when Americans were introduced to the
      concept of formula-raised veal, an idea developed in Holland. Farmers there had found that
      if they fed calves on a formula comprising of skim milk, other dairy by-products, and some­
      times antibiotics, they could bring larger veal to market with better-looking, more ﬂavorful,
      and even more tender meat. When this technology was imported into the United States,
      veal became much more widely available here as well. But it has never really caught on with
      the majority of American cooks. Pale in color, delicate in ﬂavor, and very expensive, veal is
      still perceived by most home cooks here as the prima donna of red meat, a restaurant dish
      intimately connected with the grand cuisines of Europe. As a result, it is the meat that we
      eat the least of, consuming less than one pound per person per year.
               It is true that veal has largely been a restaurant item here, but that does not need to
      continue to be the case. To change this perception, we can look to the home cooks of
      Europe, who have long incorporated veal into their repertoire as a luxury item.
               Food historian Waverly Root suggests that Italians are particularly fond of veal
      because, like pasta, it has a subtlety of ﬂavor that allows the cook to demonstrate his or her
      dexterity with sauces without having the taste of the meat interfere. Whatever the strength of
      that hypothesis, it is true that many of the best-known dishes of the Italian classic repertoire,
      from saltimbocca to veal piccata to osso buco, take advantage of the delicate ﬂavor of this
      young meat. The German contribution to classic veal dishes is the wide range of schnitzels,
      while Eastern European cooking features wonderful veal stews, and classic French cuisine
      contains numerous veal dishes from veal Cordon Bleu to the stew known as blanquette de veau.
               We enjoy the dishes of this classical repertoire, in which veal tends to be combined
      with other subtle and often expensive ingredients, and there are quite a few incarnations of
      that ﬂavor dynamic here. But we also like to push the veal envelope a bit in terms of ﬂavor
      combinations, matching this delicate meat with ingredients that are a bit more robust. It
      works surprisingly well, particularly when the dishes in question are braises and stews.
               In fact, as we widened the range of veal cuts that we were cooking, we were amazed at
      how well this aristocrat of meats worked in homey, rough-and-tumble dishes. It’s just not the
      way most of us think of veal. So we did some investigating, and came up with an explanation.
               Veal’s surprising afﬁnity for stews and braises derives from the same characteristic as
      its pale delicacy–its youth. Since veal calves do not live long enough to develop any apprecia­
      ble amount of intramuscular fat, their meat is quite lean. This is generally not a great quality
      for meat that you want to cook long and slow, because fat helps keep meat moist and ﬂavor­
      ful during the extended cooking process. But veal also contains a hidden advantage in the


160   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
form of collagen, the structural protein that holds together muscle segments in the ﬂesh of
animals and binds the muscles to the bones. The ﬁne muscle ﬁbers of young animals contain
a very high proportion of this connective tissue, and veal is particularly high in it. In fact, veal
has about twice as much collagen, pound for pound, as even a year-old calf.
        Now, it is true that collagen can make meat very tough. But when the meat is cooked
slowly in the presence of moisture, the collagen melts into tender, slightly viscous gelatin.
This transformation takes place far more quickly and easily in meat from young animals
than from older animals. And because veal contains so much collagen, as the meat stews or
braises, the gelatin that is quickly formed from the collagen almost magically transforms the
cooking liquid into a sauce, imparting to it a luxuriously suave, silken texture.
        So don’t be intimidated by veal’s haughty reputation. Get on the phone to your butcher
and order up a special roast, or bring home a veal breast and braise it in some ﬂavorful liquid,
or try using veal the next time you feel like making a hearty, warming stew. We think you’ll
ﬁnd that, despite its famed delicacy, veal doesn’t have to be such a prima donna after all.


       ABOUT CUTS OF VEAL


                         Tough but Flavorful Section
                                        Big Money Section
                                                  Chop Section   Roast and
                                                                 Scallopine
                                                                  Section




        The key to enjoying veal is ﬁnding a butcher who is willing to get the various
cuts for you, because there’s a lot more to veal cookery than just osso buco and wiener
schnitzel, delicious as they are.
        To gain an understanding of the cuts of veal, you have to face one primary fact: like
it or not, a veal is a baby cow. This means that cuts of veal are basically the same as cuts of
beef, but smaller and more tender.
        As with the cow, we try to understand the veal calf by dividing it into four parts.
Starting from the front of the animal, they are: the shoulder, which is the equivalent of the
beef chuck, the Tough but Flavorful Section; next comes the rib, known by us as the Big
Money Section; then there’s the loin, which we call the Steak Section in the cow but will
name the Chop Section in the calf; and ﬁnally the round or leg, which we called the Roast
Section in the cow. Here we add a second designation, calling it the Roast and Scallopine
Section.
        The shoulder area provides us with one of our favorite cuts of veal, the shank, as
well as a shoulder roast for braising and a shoulder blade steak, often labeled as a shoulder


                                                       VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?             161
      chop in the supermarket, which is great for grilling. The shoulder is also what we consider
      the best source for veal stew meat.
               From the rib we get what may well be the single most expensive cut in the meat world,
      the rack of veal, which can be formed into the regal crown roast of veal. Any questions about
      why this is the Big Money Section? If you cut the rib roast into smaller cuts, it becomes the
      world famous veal rib chops, which would be rib-eye steaks if this were a cow. The ends of the
      ribs, which some people call riblets and others call short ribs, are excellent for moist cooking.
               Next up is the loin, which in its entirety is the loin roast. But it is more frequently cut
      into loin chops, which is why we call it the Chop Section. Veal chops from the loin are the
      equivalent of the T-bone and porterhouse steaks. Take the bones out of these chops, and
      you are left with the top loin and tenderloin muscles, which may in turn be cut into strip
      steaks as well as veal medallions, which are the equivalent of the beef ﬁlet mignon. The loin
      is also the home of the veal ﬂank; if you can ﬁnd this in the butcher store, it is a very unique
      and interesting cut of meat, well worth searching out.
               The round, or the Roast and Scallopine Section in our lexicography, is the best
      source for those small, ﬂat pieces of meat known variously as scallopine, cutlets, birdies, or
      schnitzel. It is also home to the rump roast and, if the whole leg is cooked as a single roast,
      the steamship round.
               Let’s look at these various cuts in terms of the methods that you use to cook them.
               Roasting is a great technique for veal. Because of its tenderness, basically most large
      cuts of veal are appropriate for roasting. Veal roasts are splendid for big gatherings or celebra­
      tory events. Our favorite is the rack of veal, otherwise known as the rib roast, which is one of
      the nicest restaurant cuts that you can prepare at home when you want to serve something
      really special. Veal loin is also exquisite, as is the rump roast, which is considerably more ten­
      der than its beef counterpart.
               A cut that has recently caught the imagination of many American cooks is the veal
      chop, the best known of the veal cuts that are cooked by dry, high-heat methods. We’re
      along for the ride on this one, because chops are our #1 favorite cut of veal, probably
      because they take so well to grilling and we love to grill. And, as we mentioned already, all
      those cuts that are steaks in beef are chops in veal. So, for example, the equivalent of the
      New York strip is the veal top loin chop. That means that veal chops, whether from the rib,
      the loin, or even the shoulder, are very delicious cuts indeed.
               If you can get your hands on them, the über-tender tenderloin and the ﬂavorful
      ﬂank steak are also superb cuts for dry cooking. Then there is perhaps the most familiar
      small and tender version of veal, best known as scallopini. These are basically thin slices of
      veal, usually from the leg, that are cooked quickly, usually sautéed, often in breading. They
      are traditionally served with a pan sauce; they can also be stuffed, at which point they
      become known as birdies, roulades, or paupiettes. These little guys are quick-cooking,
      rather impressive, and a good vehicle for combining veal with other luxe ingredients from
      crabmeat to pancetta to Cognac.
               The recent popularity of osso buco has done a lot to help popularize the braising
      approach to veal among American cooks. Along with the veal breast and certain cuts taken



162   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
from the shoulder, the shank has a particularly high level of collagen, even for veal. All three
of these create beautifully rich, silken sauces as they braise.
        Veal is also perfectly suited for stews and kebabs. Fortunately, since veal is so tender, it
is not as crucial as with other meats to know which cut is the source of your stew or kebab
meat. So, unlike pork or beef, when you buy prepackaged “veal stew meat”—one of the few
cuts of veal that is readily available in most grocery stores—it will almost always be tender
enough to make good stew or tasty skewers. But if you have a choice, get cuts from the shoul­
der and cut them into cubes yourself, which will ensure that you get the very best ﬂavor.
        In addition to making for great stews and braises, the high collagen content of veal
also makes ground veal an excellent choice for meat loaf. The same dynamic that creates a
silky stewing or braising liquid makes for a meat loaf with the dense texture and rich mouth
feel of a pâté.
        Veal is also the best source for organ meats of all varieties, which are perfect for the
“green eggs and ham” approach to cooking. You might want to reserve brains for your
most adventurous friends, but sweetbreads are awesome when grilled and calf ’s liver, with
its delicate, rich ﬂavor and silky texture, is a surprise to anyone who has eaten only beef
liver before. This is your chance to really widen your meat horizons and get a reputation as
a bold and daring cook while you’re at it.


       OU R TOP 5 FAVOR ITE CUTS OF VEAL

       1. Breast

       2. Loin chop

       3. Shank

       4. Sweetbreads

       5. Flank steak



       BUYING VEAL

       When it comes to choosing veal, the ﬁrst choice is basically a political one,
because veal is the most controversial of all red meats.
       Traditionally, calves intended for veal have been raised in tight conﬁnement, because
exercise causes their muscles to develop, which in turn makes their meat less tender. They
have also been fed a diet consisting largely of milk, so that their meat will be so pale as to be
almost colorless. The modern version of this milk diet is the formula we talked about
above, developed by Dutch farmers and introduced to the United States in the 1960s.
       Veal raised in this manner is referred to as “milk-fed” or “formula-fed.” It is preferred
by those who value extreme tenderness and very pale meat. Some argue that only this type
of veal is acceptable for use in traditional recipes.



                                                    VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                163
              There are others, however, who believe that raising veal in this manner is inhumane.
      They favor what is called “grass-fed” or “range-fed” veal. As the name implies, these calves
      are allowed more movement, and their diet is at least partially composed of grass. This type
      of veal may also be called “natural” or “humanely raised” veal. According to the USDA, it
      must be labeled “calf.”
              The meat from grass-fed veal is, as you might expect, slightly less tender than that of
      milk-fed veal, and it is also a darker color, a dark rosy pink. It also has a more pronounced
      (some would say less bland) ﬂavor.
              As more people have opted for humanely raised veal, which was once obtainable
      only by mail-order, it has become more readily available in butcher shops and natural food
      stores. There is no doubt that the raising of grass-fed veal is more humane. (We have to add,
      though, that no animals raised for food are really treated that well. Have you ever been to a
      chicken farm? So this all seems a difference of degree.) You may wish to promote this more
      humane approach to raising calves, or you may agree with traditionalists who maintain that
      meat from calves that are not raised in conﬁnement is not really veal. The choice is up to
      you. As for ﬂavor and texture of the meat, it is deﬁnitely a matter of degree; either type is
      going to be mild in ﬂavor and very tender.
              Other than bob veal, the meat you buy may be from calves between eight and twelve
      weeks of age and typically weighing between a hundred and ﬁfty and two hundred and ﬁfty
      pounds, or it may come from calves as old as sixteen weeks, with a weight of up to four
      hundred pounds. As with other meats, the older, the tougher, but in this case, it is just not
      that much of an issue. Since veal is hard to locate to begin with, we wouldn’t spend a whole
      lot of time worrying about its exact age.
              Veal is rarely graded, because all veal is tender and because marbling, the intramus­
      cular fat that is a virtue in beef, is (or should be) all but absent from veal. So grading is not
      an issue. But color is. Traditionally raised veal should be a pale grayish pink, while natural
      veal, or calf, should be a deep rosy pink. The meat of either type should have a very ﬁne
      grained texture, the fat should be ﬁrm and very white, and the marrow should be reddish.
              Veal does not keep as well as other red meats. It should be stored in the refrigerator,
      well wrapped (see page 27), for only one or two days before you cook it. It will keep in the
      freezer, again well wrapped, for as long as six months, but it’s really best to use it within a
      month or two.
              Veal’s moist nature also makes it particularly important that you dry it very well
      before you brown it. If you don’t, the liquid will not only make the oil splatter all over the
      place, it will also cause the meat to steam rather than brown.
              Because veal can be difﬁcult to ﬁnd, and because it would be a shame to miss out on
      the recipes in this chapter because you don’t have a good source of veal, wherever it is
      appropriate, we have listed cuts of beef, lamb, or (most often) pork that can be substituted
      for the veal cut that we call for. You will also notice that in most of the recipes that follow
      we haven’t given suggestions for using leftovers. That’s not an oversight; it’s because in our
      experience, almost no one ever buys more veal than they are planning to eat. You might
      think that’s only because it’s so expensive, but try a few of these recipes and we think you’ll
      ﬁnd another reason—it’s really delicious.


164   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                       RECIPES FOR
         LARGE TENDER CUTS OF VEAL

Rack of Veal with Roast Chestnut Stuffing, Brandied Oranges,   10 STEPS TO GREAT ROASTED
                                                               VEAL
                                         and Light Basil Jus
                                                                1. Preheat the oven.
         Rosemary-Crusted Roasted Rack of Veal with Exotic
                                                                2. Dry the meat.
                        Mushrooms, White Wine, and Lemon
                                                                3. Season the meat well.
Honey-and-Bourbon-Glazed Roasted Loin of Veal with Crusty
                                                                4. Put the roast on a rack
              Sweet Potatoes and Smithfield Ham–Raisin Jus         in a roasting pan, set
                                                                   on the middle shelf of
         Simple Veal Rump Roast with Stilton-Stuffed Apples        the preheated oven,
                                                                   and sear it.
                Veal Steamship Round with Green Olives and
                                                                5. Turn down the oven
                                       Oven-Dried Tomatoes
                                                                   temperature.

                                                                6. Add the vegetables,
                                                                   if any.

                                                                7. Check for doneness
                                                                   early and often.

                                                                8. Transfer the meat to a
                                                                   platter, cover loosely
                                                                   with foil, and allow to
                                                                   rest for 10 to 20
                                                                   minutes, depending on
                                                                   size.

                                                                9. Pour off the excess fat
                                                                   from the pan, add
                                                                   stock, deglaze, and
                                                                   simmer to reduce the
                                                                   liquid.

                                                               10. Carve and serve,
                                                                   passing the jus
                                                                   separately.




                                                                                         165
THE CUT

There are many cuts of veal
                                  Rack of Veal with Chestnut
that are tender enough to
dry-roast, but this is the
                                  Stuffing, Brandied Oranges, and
one with the most ﬂavor.
It’s a pretty fancy cut, so       Light Basil Jus
you will deﬁnitely be head­
ing to your butcher for this.             S E RVE S 6 TO 7

As always with cuts that
are somewhat unusual, it          If you’re looking for a very impressive dish to serve for a holiday dinner, you’ve
pays to call a couple of days
in advance to be sure the
                                  just found it. The rib rack has all the best attributes of veal: It is tender, it has
butcher can get it for you.       some rich ﬂavor, and it makes a nice foil for other somewhat subtle ingredi­
                                  ents. Here we just sprinkle it with salt and pepper and roast it very simply,
OTHER NAMES                       then dress it up with a chestnut stufﬁng, brandied oranges, and a light jus ﬂa­
Hotel rack, veal rib roast.
                                  vored with basil.
                                          The key to making this dish, with its various components that come
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

A loin roast of veal, either
                                  together at the end, is to make everything in the right order: Get the veal in
boneless or bone-in, would        the oven to brown, then make the stufﬁng so it can go into the oven when you
work very well in this            turn the heat down, then brandy the oranges, and then, when the meat
recipe. You could also sub­
stitute a pork loin or rib
                                  comes out of the oven, set it aside to rest and make the quick jus.
roast.                                    When you have this dish coming to the table, all you need to complete
                                  your holiday dinner is some applesauce and the green vegetable of your
BUTCHERSPEAK                      choice, or, if you’re feeling really ambitious or have another cook who wants
This cut is known in the
                                  to chip into the effort, maybe a cheese soufﬂé.
trade as a “hotel rack,”
probably because it was
                                          One 7-bone rack of veal, frenched, about 5 pounds
often served in fancy hotel
dining rooms in days past.                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
If you go to any butcher
                                          FOR THE STUFFING
who supplies meat to high-
end restaurants and ask                   3 tablespoons unsalted butter
him for a hotel rack, you                 1 red onion, peeled and diced small
will get exactly what you
                                          1 cup celery diced small
want: a 7-bone veal roast
with the bones frenched.                  1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                          2 tablespoons fresh thyme leaves (or 1 tablespoon dried thyme)
                                          5 cups 1-inch cubes country-style bread
                                          1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                          One 10-ounce can chestnuts, rinsed
                                          1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                          Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                          FOR THE ORANGES

                                          2 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                          5 navel oranges, peeled and pulled apart into segments
                                          1⁄ 3   cup sugar



166             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1⁄ 3   cup brandy or Cognac
      Pinch of salt

      F O R T H E G R AV Y
      1⁄ 2   cup dry red wine
      1⁄ 2   cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh basil
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

       2. Dry the veal and sprinkle it generously with salt and pepper. Place
it on a rack in a roasting pan and roast until well browned, about 20 min­
utes. Reduce the oven temperature to 300°F and cook until the meat is
done to your liking, 30 to 40 minutes for medium-rare. To check for done-
ness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast and let it
sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F
is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull
it at 132°F.
      3. Once the veal has gone into the oven, make the stufﬁng: In a very
large sauté pan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the onion and cel­
ery and cook, stirring occasionally, until the onion is translucent, 7 to 9
minutes. Add the garlic and thyme and sauté, stirring, for 1 minute. Add
the bread cubes, stir to coat well with the butter, and sauté, stirring occa­
sionally, until lightly toasted, 3 to 4 minutes. Turn the heat to medium-
high, add the stock, and stir gently to distribute it evenly. Add the chestnuts
and parsley, stir gently to mix, and season with salt and pepper. Turn the
stufﬁng into a lightly buttered casserole dish or other ovenproof dish and
cover (with aluminum foil if the dish doesn’t have a cover). When you turn
the oven down to 300°F for the veal, place the stufﬁng in the oven and
cook for 30 minutes.
       4. After the stufﬁng has gone into the oven, make the oranges: In a
large sauté pan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the orange seg­
ments and stir gently to coat with the butter. Sprinkle the sugar over the
oranges, add the brandy and salt, and cook, stirring occasionally, until the
oranges are well glazed, about 20 minutes. Remove from the heat and set
aside.
       5. When the veal is done, transfer it to a platter, tent it loosely with
foil, and let it rest for 20 minutes or so.
      6. Tilt the roasting pan to skim off and discard the fat that has col­
lected in the pan, leaving the drippings behind. Place the roasting pan on



                                                       VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   167
                                the stove over medium-high heat and add the red wine and stock. Bring to
                                a simmer, stirring to dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the
                                pan, and continue to simmer until the liquid is reduced by about half,
                                about 15 minutes. Stir in the basil and season with salt and pepper.
                                       7. Carve the rack between the bones into individual chops. Place a
                                small serving of stufﬁng on each plate, place a chop on top, drizzle the
                                basil jus over the top, put several orange segments alongside, and serve.



THE CUT

See Rack of Veal with
                                Rosemary-Crusted Roasted Rack
Chestnut Stufﬁng (page
166) for details about rack
                                of Veal with Exotic Mushrooms,
of veal, also known as veal
rib roast.                      White Wine, and Lemon
                                        S E RVE S 7 TO 8
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Any veal loin roast would
work great here, as would       We love roasts because they don’t take much effort or preparation time but
a pork loin roast.              the end result is fantastic. The roast in question here is a rack of veal, which
                                is what veal rib chops are before they are cut apart. So when you slice the
BUTCHERSPEAK
                                roast, you end up serving each person a luscious veal chop. This particular
Ask the guy behind the
counter to cut through the      preparation features the classic veal-lemon-mushroom combination, which to
chine bone so that you can      our minds is hard to beat. To make it easy and to really get the ﬂavors work­
easily slice through the        ing together, we roast the mushrooms right along with the veal, then make a
roast when it’s done.
                                sauce with them while the roast is resting after coming out of the oven.
                                        Serve this with risotto or Hash Browns (page 412), depending on your
                                mood, and, of course, a green salad.

                                        3 tablespoons kosher salt, plus more to taste
                                        3 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper, plus more to taste
                                        3 tablespoons fresh rosemary needles (or 11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons dried rosemary)
                                        2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                        1⁄ 2   cup olive oil
                                        One 7-bone rack of veal, frenched, about 5 pounds
                                        3 pounds mushrooms of your choice (portobello, shiitake, cremini,
                                           chanterelles, enoki, etc., or even white mushrooms), trimmed and left
                                           whole if small, cut into thick slices if large
                                        2 tablespoons vegetable oil
                                        1 tablespoon unsalted butter
                                        1 red onion, peeled and diced small
                                        1 cup dry white wine




168           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     2 cups veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
     1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)


     1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

      2. In a small bowl, combine the salt, pepper, rosemary, garlic, and
one quarter cup of the olive oil and mix well. Pat the rack of veal dry with
paper towels and rub it thoroughly with this mixture, pressing lightly to be
sure it adheres. Place the veal on a rack in a roasting pan (use one that will
be big enough for the mushrooms to ﬁt around the meat) and roast until
well browned, about 20 minutes.
     3. While the veal is browning, toss the mushrooms gently in a large
bowl with the remaining 1⁄4 cup olive oil and salt and pepper to taste.
       4. When the veal is browned, add the mushrooms to the roasting
pan, reduce the oven temperature to 300°F, and roast until the veal is done
to your liking, 20 to 40 minutes longer for medium-rare. To check for
doneness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast and
let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 126°F is medium-rare,
134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like
to pull it at 132°F. When the roast is done to your liking, remove it from
the oven, cover it loosely with foil, and let it rest for 20 minutes or so.
Remove the mushrooms from the roasting pan and set them aside.
       5. In a large sauté pan, heat the vegetable oil and butter over
medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and sauté,
stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the wine and
stock, bring to a simmer, and continue to simmer until reduced by two
thirds, about 20 minutes. Add the mushrooms, with their accumulated
juices, and cook, stirring gently, for 2 minutes more. Remove from the
heat and stir in the parsley, lemon juice, and salt and pepper to taste.
     6.     Carve the rack into chops and serve, topped with the mushroom
sauce.




                                                    VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   169
THE CUT

The loin runs a close sec­
                                  Honey-and-Bourbon-Glazed
ond to the rack of veal as
top veal roast. It is very ten­
                                  Roasted Loin of Veal with Crusty
der, of course, but it also
has a good amount of ﬂa­          Sweet Potatoes and Smithfield
vor. That should come as
no surprise, given the fact       Ham–Raisin Jus
that if this were beef, it
would be the section that                 S E RVE S 6
contains those most excel­
lent steaks, the T-bone and
                                  Anytime you cook a big veal roast, it’s an occasion. It may be a holiday, it may
the porterhouse. This cut is
also slightly less fatty than     be a celebration of an important event in someone’s life, or it may just be that
the rack. As with most            you feel like cooking something special for a group of friends. That doesn’t
large veal cuts, this is one
                                  mean, though, that you can’t have some fun with the dish. Here we take a
you’ll need to special-order
from your butcher.                very luxe piece of meat, the veal loin, and pair it with some down-home South­
                                  ern ﬂavors—bourbon, sweet potatoes, and the justly famed Smithﬁeld ham
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE            that I (Chris) grew up with in tidewater Virginia. If you can’t get your hands on
Rack of veal is the natural       a Smithﬁeld, you can use prosciutto or any American country ham.
substitute in this recipe; a
pork loin roast would also
                                          In keeping with the Southern slant of this dish, serve it with corn bread
be very nice.                     or grits and a big green salad.

                                          One 3-pound boneless veal loin, fat trimmed to 1 ⁄4 inch
                                          Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                          4 sweet potatoes, peeled and halved
                                          2 tablespoons olive oil
                                          1⁄ 2   cup honey
                                          1 ⁄4   cup bourbon

                                          FOR THE JUS

                                          1 cup dry red wine
                                          1 tablespoon unsalted butter
                                          1 red onion, peeled and diced small
                                          2 cups veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                          1 ⁄4   pound thinly sliced Smithﬁeld ham, diced small (or substitute prosciutto
                                                 or any American country ham)
                                          1 ⁄4   cup dark raisins
                                          3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh sage
                                          Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                          1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.

                                        2. Dry the veal loin with paper towels, sprinkle it generously with
                                  salt and pepper, and place it on a rack in a large roasting pan. Rub the



170             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
sweet potatoes with the oil and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Place the
sweet potatoes around the meat. In a small bowl, combine the honey and
bourbon, mix well, and brush both the veal and potatoes with the mixture.
       3. Place the roasting pan in the oven and roast, basting a couple of
times with the honey mixture, until the potatoes are crusty and the veal is
done to your liking, 40 to 50 minutes for medium-rare. To check for done-
ness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast and let it
sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F
is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 150°F is well-done; we like to pull
it at 132°F. When the roast is done to your liking, remove it from the oven,
cover it loosely with foil, and let it rest for 20 minutes or so.
      4. Tilt the roasting pan and spoon off any accumulated fat from the
pan juices. Place the pan on the stove over medium-high heat, add the
wine, and cook, stirring to dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of
the pan, about 4 minutes. Remove from the heat and set aside.
      5. In a large sauté pan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the
onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.
Raise the heat to medium-high, add the stock, and simmer until the sauce
is reduced by two thirds and thick enough to coat the back of a spoon, 10
to 15 minutes. Add the wine and crusty bits from the roasting pan, the
ham, and raisins and cook, stirring, for 2 minutes more. Remove from the
heat, stir in the sage, and season with salt and pepper.
     6. Cut the veal into slices about 1 inch thick, drizzle it and the pota­
toes with the jus, and serve.




                                                 VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   171
THE CUT

Like the beef rump roast,
                                  Simple Veal Rump Roast with
this is what its name says:
the rump of the beast.
                                  Stilton-Stuffed Apples
While some people feel
that the beef rump roast                  S E RVE S 4

is a little tough for dry-
roasting, there are no such       This is a pretty straight-ahead French-derived preparation, which works well
qualms about the veal
                                  with the veal rump roast. As with many French dishes, its ﬂavor base is a trio
rump. Like most veal
roasts, this is one you’re        of everyday vegetables—onions, carrots, and celery—that, when chopped and
going to have to call ahead       sautéed together in a little fat, are called a mirepoix.
and reserve at your butcher
                                          Not being French, we had to add some cheese-stuffed apples to give
shop.
                                  the dish an American feel. Put the apples in the oven when you reduce the
OTHER NAME                        heat after browning the veal; they need to spend longer in the low-tempera­
Rump of veal.                     ture oven than the meat does, but that just means that the meat has a chance
                                  to rest and get its juices redistributed before you carve it.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                          This is a grand dish for that fall evening when you want to feel as if
Any veal roast will work
                                  you’re ready for the winter to come. And since it’s veal, it has a certain air of
very well with this recipe.
You can also use any ten­         luxury about it too.
der roast of pork.
                                          One 3-pound boneless veal rump roast
                                          Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                          2 onions, peeled and diced medium
                                          1 carrot, peeled and diced medium
                                          1 stalk celery, diced medium
                                          1⁄ 3   cup olive oil

                                          FOR THE APPLES

                                          3 tablespoons unsalted butter, at room temperature
                                          4 Golden Delicious, Rome, Cortland, Baldwin, or Northern Spy apples,
                                             peeled and cored
                                          1 ⁄4   cup honey
                                          1 ⁄4   cup dry red wine
                                          1⁄ 2   cinnamon stick (or 1 ⁄ 2 teaspoon ground cinnamon)
                                          2 cardamom pods, crushed (or a pinch of ground cardamom)
                                          8 ounces Stilton or other blue cheese of your choice


                                          1 cup dry red wine
                                          2 teaspoons dried thyme
                                          1 whole clove
                                          1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                          2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh parsley




172             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

     2. Dry the veal with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with salt
and pepper. Place it on a rack in a roasting pan and roast until well
browned, about 20 minutes.
       3. While the veal is browning, prepare the vegetables and the apples:
For the vegetables, combine the onions, carrot, celery, and olive oil in a
large bowl, toss well to coat, and set aside. For the apples, using the 3 table­
spoons of butter, butter a casserole dish just big enough to hold the apples
comfortably and arrange the apples upright in it. In a small saucepan, com­
bine the honey, wine, cinnamon, and cardamom and simmer for about 5
minutes. Brush the apples generously with this mixture and set them
aside.
      4. When the veal has browned, reduce the oven temperature to
300°F and add the vegetables to the roasting pan. Roast, stirring the veg­
etables around once or twice, until the meat is done to your liking, about
40 minutes more for medium-rare. To check for doneness, insert a meat
thermometer into the dead center of the roast and let it sit for 5 seconds,
then read the temperature: 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is medium,
150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull it at 126°F.
       5. Meanwhile when you add the vegetables to the roasting pan, place
the apples in the oven on a separate rack. Bake the apples, basting fre­
quently with more of the wine mixture, for 30 minutes. Remove the
apples from the oven, crumble the cheese, and push a quarter of it into the
center of each apple. Return the apples to the oven and bake until quite
soft, about 30 minutes more.
     6. When the roast is done to your liking, remove it from the oven,
cover it loosely with foil, and let it rest for 20 minutes while you make the
sauce.
      7. Tilt the roasting pan and spoon off any accumulated fat from the
pan juices. Place the pan on the stove over medium-high heat, add the
wine, and cook, stirring to dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of
the pan, about 2 minutes. Add the thyme, clove, and stock, bring to a sim­
mer, and skim any scum off the surface of the meat, then simmer until the
liquid is slightly reduced, about 5 minutes. Stir in the parsley and remove
from the heat.
    8. Carve the roast into thin slices. Put an apple on each plate, arrange
some of the meat around it, drizzle with the sauce, and serve.




                                                   VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   173
THE CUT

A “steamship round” is the
                                 Veal Steamship Round with Green
name that professional
chefs give to a whole leg of
                                 Olives and Oven-Dried Tomatoes
beef. As nearly as we can
tell, it got its name because            S E RVE S 30 OR MOR E

it used to be the main
attraction of the “carving       What the heck is this, you might ask? Well, it’s a whole leg of veal. This is a
tables” on steamships. In
                                 real carnivore’s feast, the kind of thing that comes to mind when they talk
any case, a steamship
round of beef is so big that     about “a haunch of meat” in old English novels. At ﬁrst it might seem a little
it requires professional-        daunting, but when all is said and done, it’s really just a large roast. You rub it,
size cooking equipment.
                                 you put it in the oven, you brown it at 500°F, and then you turn down the heat
But here we take advan­
tage of the smaller size of      and cook it for a long time, checking with your trusty thermometer to be sure
veal cuts, and basically call    you don’t overcook it. Because of the size of the roast (which may not ﬁt in
for a whole leg of veal cut
                                 your oven—check ﬁrst to be sure), there is a margin of error here of about an
in the manner of a
steamship round. You’ll          hour, so you need to keep checking doneness over quite a long period of
really have to talk to your      time. But, assuming you’ve got a large enough roasting pan, it’s really no
butcher about this,
                                 harder to cook than any other roast, which means not hard at all.
because it is a very odd
request. But we are willing              And it is worth it, because this is a cut of meat that will get you a lot of
to lay odds that he will be      distance with friends and family. This is what I (Chris) served when my wife,
happy and impressed that
                                 Marcy Jackson, and I had our “families meet and greet” event at my house
you are even attempting
something like this. Obvi­       shortly after we got engaged. I chose to prepare this for my ﬁancée’s friends
ously, this is a cut for a       and family in the hope that they might like me, and it worked. I’m still very pop­
very special occasion, but
                                 ular with my in-laws to this day as a result of cooking this for them, despite all
it’s got great ﬂavor and that
incredible smooth, tight         the things I have done to them since then. In fact, it worked so well that Marcy
veal texture, so your guests     and I also served it at our wedding. If you cook this and serve it the way that I
will love it.
                                 did, you will have some happy guests. (Also, it’s a perfect excuse to have all
                                 your friends over at the same time and repay all those social debts in one fell
                                 swoop.)
                                         We call for oven-dried tomatoes here, which you need to prepare in
                                 advance, since they require even more time in the oven than the steamship
                                 round. But you can literally do this in your sleep—just put the tomatoes in a
                                 low oven and leave them overnight. You will be surprised at the luscious tex­
                                 ture and deep ﬂavors of tomatoes you have dried yourself. If you run out of
                                 time, though, you can substitute store-bought sun-dried tomatoes (not the
                                 oil-marinated kind) that you have soaked in warm water for a couple of hours.
                                         I served this to my future in-laws with some nice crusty bread, some
                                 eggplant chutney, and some mango chutney and had people make roast veal
                                 sandwiches. I recommend you try it that way too.




174            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     F O R T H E T O M AT O E S

     12 plum tomatoes
     3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     1 tablespoon minced fresh rosemary (optional)


     1 veal steamship round, about 25 pounds
     2 cups kosher salt
     2 cups freshly cracked black pepper
     4 onions, peeled and diced small
     6 stalks celery, diced small
     4 carrots, peeled and diced small
     2 heads garlic, halved
     1 bottle dry white wine
     4 cups veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
     2 cups brine-cured green olives, pitted
     1 cup fresh thyme leaves (or 6 tablespoons dried)



      1. Prepare the tomatoes: Cut the tomatoes lengthwise in half, rub
them with the oil, and sprinkle them with salt and pepper and the rose­
mary if desired. Place the tomatoes cut side up in a single layer on a wire
rack set on a cookie sheet and place the sheet on the middle rack of the
oven. Turn the oven to 200°F and let the tomatoes dry for about 8 hours;
they should be reduced in size by about one quarter and shriveled on the
outside but still tender and juicy on the inside. Remove from the oven and
set aside. (They can be covered and refrigerated for 4 to 5 days.)
     2. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

      3. Rub the veal all over with the salt and pepper, pressing gently to be
sure they adhere. Place the meat on a rack in a very large roasting pan and
roast until well browned, about 30 minutes. Reduce the heat to 300°F and
add the onions, celery, carrots, and garlic to the pan. Cook, stirring the
vegetables around every 30 minutes or so, until the veal is done to your lik­
ing, 3 to 4 hours for medium-rare. To check for doneness, insert a meat
thermometer into the dead center of the roast and let it sit for 5 seconds,
then read the temperature: 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is medium,
140°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull it at 132°F.
When the roast is done, remove it from the oven, cover it loosely with foil,
and let it rest for at least 20 and up to 40 minutes.




                                                  VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   175
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE                   4. Place the roasting pan over 2 burners on the stove over medium-
You are bound to have            high heat and add the wine and stock. Bring to a simmer, stirring to dis­
some leftovers from this,
                                 solve any brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan. Strain the liquid
which is part of the beauty
of serving it. We like to use
                                 into a large saucepan, discarding the solids. Skim the fat off the surface of
those leftovers to make          the liquid, then add the olives and tomatoes, bring to a simmer, and sim­
high-toned versions of           mer until the liquid is reduced by about half, 15 to 20 minutes. Remove
classic peasant-style
                                 from the heat and stir in the thyme.
dishes. Try Cuban-style
veal sandwiches, made                 5. Carve the veal into thin slices and serve, moistening with the pan
with layers of veal, ham,
                                 sauce and passing the remaining sauce separately.
and cheese, for example,
or veal shepherd’s pie. Or
substitute veal for tongue
in A Severe Tongue Hash­
ing (page 156), or for
corned beef in Corned
Beef and Sweet Potato
Hash (page 148).




176            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                        RECIPES FOR
           LARGE TOUGH CUTS OF VEAL

               Latin-Style Barbecued Veal Breast with Sour   10 STEPS TO GREAT BRAISED
                                                             VEAL
                          Orange–Chipotle Barbecue Sauce
                                                              1. Dry the meat.
Beer-Braised Veal Breast with Macumber Turnips and Greens
                                                              2. Season the meat well.

     Tomato-Braised Veal Shanks with Pumpkin Risotto and      3. Sear the meat.
                              Lemon-Pistachio Power Pack
                                                              4. Remove the meat from
                                                                 the pot, adjust the
          EZ–Style Sherry-Braised Veal Shank with Raisins
                                                                 amount of fat in the
                                              and Parsley        pot, and sauté the
                                                                 aromatics and
 Orange-Braised Veal Shoulder with Sweet-and-Sour Braised        vegetables.
                                 Cabbage and Fennel Slaw
                                                              5. Deglaze the pot with
                                                                 some of the liquid.

                                                              6. Return the meat to the
                                                                 pot, along with enough
                                                                 liquid to cover it about
                                                                 halfway.

                                                              7. Bring to a simmer, skim
                                                                 the ﬁlm, cover the pot,
                                                                 and place in a 300°F
                                                                 oven.

                                                              8. Check for doneness
                                                                 early and often: Look
                                                                 for “fork-tender.”

                                                              9. Skim the fat and any
                                                                 ﬁlm from the liquid and,
                                                                 if you want, remove the
                                                                 meat and reduce the
                                                                 liquid; season to taste.

                                                             10. Carve the meat and
                                                                 serve with the braising
                                                                 liquid on the side.




                                                                                     177
THE CUT

This cut is just what the
                                  Latin-Style Barbecued Veal Breast
name says: the breast of
the veal. It is quite cheap
                                  with Sour Orange–Chipotle
for veal, because it has a
lot of fat and bones. But if      Barbecue Sauce
cooked long and slow, it
becomes very tender, and it               S E RVE S 6 TO 8

is perhaps the most ﬂavor­
ful veal cut of all. You will     This is one of our absolute favorite cuts of veal. It is ﬁlled with bones and fat,
have to order this in
advance from your butcher,
                                  but if you cook it up over the slow heat and smoke of a low ﬁre, you will have
but it’s not that unusual a       one of the ﬁnest eating experiences of your life. What we’re talking about
cut for him, and when you         here is basically veal bacon; it is tender, juicy, and full of ﬂavor, and this is def­
place the order, the
butcher’s estimation of
                                  initely one place where the mild nature of veal becomes a real advantage.
your meat knowledge will                  So we’re going bold with this cut. First we rub it with a ﬂavorful paste
deﬁnitely go up a notch.          and let it sit over the ﬁre for 4 hours, then coat it with a barbecue sauce with
                                  the ﬂavors of Latin America. (If you have access to sour oranges, use them in
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                  place of regular juice oranges in the barbecue sauce, and reduce the lime
A great substitute here
would be a bone-in pork           juice by half.)
belly, a.k.a. bone-in rack of             If you take the time to order this from your butcher and prepare this
pork ribs.
                                  recipe, I guarantee that you will be a hero to your cooking friends. Try serving
                                  with sweet corn, a sweet potato salad, or maybe a Sweet Potato–Raisin
BUTCHERSPEAK

The veal breast is very
                                  Hobo Pack (page 441).
often stuffed before it’s
                                          F OR TH E SAU CE
cooked, so butchers are
used to cutting it with a                 2 cups fresh orange juice (about 4 oranges)
pocket for the stufﬁng. But               1 cup dry red wine
stufﬁng the breast is a
                                          1 to 2 tablespoons minced canned chipotle chiles in adobo
tedious task, and the stuff­
                                          1⁄ 3   cup molasses
ing often leaks out anyway,
                                          1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
so we prefer to cook it
straight on. Make sure your               1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
butcher knows you don’t
want a pocket in the breast.              1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
But do ask him to nick the
                                          1⁄ 3   cup fresh lemon juice (about 11 ⁄ 2 lemons)
chine bone so you can get
                                          1 ⁄4   cup minced garlic
between the ribs to serve
the meat. Some people say                 1 ⁄4   cup cumin seeds (or 2 tablespoons ground cumin)
that the middle section of                1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt
the breast is the best, but
                                          1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper
in our experience, there is
more variation in quality                 1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh oregano
from breast to breast than
                                          10 to 15 dashes Tabasco sauce
within a single breast.
                                          1 small veal breast or a portion of a larger breast, 6 to 8 pounds
                                             (with no pockets)




178             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Make the sauce: In a small saucepan, bring the orange juice, wine,
and chipotles to a boil over high heat. Reduce the heat to medium-low and
simmer vigorously until the liquid is reduced to 11⁄ 2 cups, about 30 min­
utes. Remove from the heat, stir in the molasses, lime juice, and cilantro,
and set aside.
     2. Light a ﬁre well over to one side of a kettle grill, using enough
charcoal to ﬁll half a shoe box.
      3. In a small bowl, combine the oil, lemon juice, garlic, cumin, salt,
pepper, oregano, and Tabasco sauce and mix well. Dry the meat with
paper towels, then rub it all over with this mixture, pressing to be sure it
adheres. When the ﬁre dies down and the coals are very hot, place the
meat on the side of the grill away from the coals, being careful that none
of the meat is directly over the coals. Put the lid on the grill, open the vents
one quarter of the way, and cook until the meat is super-tender, about 3
hours, adding a handful of fresh charcoal about every 30 minutes. To
check for doneness, stick a fork straight down into the meat and try to pull
the fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if the meat
hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
      4. When the meat is cool enough to handle, slice it between the
bones. Add enough of the barbecue sauce to moisten the meat well, then
serve, passing the remaining barbecue sauce on the side.




                                                   VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   179
THE CUT

See Latin-Style Barbecued
                                Beer-Braised Veal Breast with
Veal Breast (page 178) for
details on veal breast and
                                Macumber Turnips and Greens
how to get what you want
when buying it. You’ll most             S E RVE S 6 TO 8

likely have to call your
butcher in advance to get       Here’s another dish featuring our #1 favorite cut of veal, the bone-in breast.
this cut.
                                As beﬁts this homely piece of meat, this is a real country-style dish with a lot
                                of root vegetables, including both parts of the turnip, root and greens. When
                                you dip your spoon into the broth of this dish, with the rich meat and earthy
                                turnips balanced by the slight bitterness of the greens and beer, you’re going
                                to be one happy eater.
                                        We like to use the Macumber turnip, a local variety grown only in the
                                region around Westport, Massachusetts. It’s particularly sweet, since it is
                                actually a cross between a rutabaga and a radish. In other parts of the coun­
                                try, you can use regular turnips (preferably whatever is grown closest to you)
                                or rutabagas. If you don’t have access to turnip greens, substitute some other
                                slightly bitter green such as collards, kale, or (our favorite) mustard greens.
                                        Like many other ﬂavorful cuts, the veal breast is quite fatty, so be sure
                                that you skim a lot of fat off the braising liquid at the end of the cooking
                                process.

                                        3 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
                                        One 5- to 6-pound veal breast (with no pocket)
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        2 onions, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced
                                        2 carrots, peeled and cut into 1-inch chunks
                                        2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                        8 ounces cooked ham, diced small
                                        1 cup balsamic vinegar
                                        Two 12-ounce bottles dark beer of your choice
                                        2 tablespoons dark brown sugar
                                        1 bay leaf
                                        3 allspice berries (or substitute 1 whole clove)
                                        1 pound turnip greens or other cooking greens of your choice, trimmed,
                                           washed, and roughly chopped
                                        11 ⁄ 2 pounds Macumber turnips (or substitute rutabagas or small, young
                                              turnips), peeled and cut into chunks about the size of a golf ball
                                        About 1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)




180           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

     2. In a large roasting pan or Dutch oven wide enough to hold the veal
breast comfortably, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but
not smoking. Dry the veal with the paper towels, sprinkle it generously
with salt and pepper, and brown it well on all sides, 8 to 10 minutes total.
Transfer the veal to a platter.
     3. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pan as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons in the pan. Add the onions and carrots to the pan
and cook, stirring occasionally, until the onions are golden brown, 10 to 12
minutes. Add the garlic and ham and cook, stirring, for 2 minutes. Add the
vinegar and beer and bring to a simmer, scraping up any browned bits
from the bottom of the pan.
      4. Return the veal to the pan along with the brown sugar, bay leaf,
allspice, greens, turnips, and enough stock so the liquid comes to about
halfway up the sides of the meat. Bring to a simmer and skim any scum off
the surface, then cover (foil works well if using a roasting pan), place in the
oven, and cook until the meat is very tender, about 3 hours. To check for
doneness, plunge a fork straight down into the meat and try to pick up the
meat. If the fork slides out, the meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the
fork, give it more time.
      5. When the meat is done, remove it from the pan, cover it loosely
with foil, and set it aside.
      6. Skim the fat from the cooking liquid, then taste the liquid. If it
needs more ﬂavor, remove the greens and turnips with a slotted spoon,
place the roasting pan on the stove over two burners set at medium-high,
and simmer to reduce the liquid. Replace the greens and turnips. Season to
taste with salt and pepper.
      7. To serve, slice the meat and spoon the sauce, greens, and turnips
over and around it.




                                                  VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   181
THE CUT

Veal shanks can come
                                 Tomato-Braised Veal Shanks with
either from the front (fore)
leg of the animal or the
                                 Pumpkin Risotto and Lemon-
rear leg. Either one of them
will work perfectly well in      Pistachio Power Pack
this dish, but we have a
slight preference for the                S E RVE S 6

foreshank, which is just a
bit more tender. The hind        Due to the Italian dish called osso buco (literally, “bone with hole”), veal
shank, on the other hand,
tends to be a little meatier.
                                 shanks have become quite popular in the United States. This is good
You can very often ﬁnd this      because it has made them more readily available, but bad because they are
cut in the supermarket, and      also much more expensive than they used to be. They do deserve their new­
any good butcher will have
them.
                                 found place of honor, though. When cooked slowly, they create a very rich ﬂa­
                                 vorful, silken-textured sauce that is fantastic—and the meat itself is delicious
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           too.
You can substitute lamb                  This is a classic osso buco–style dish, complete with risotto and our
shanks or pork osso buco
                                 takeoff on gremolata, both of which are traditionally served with osso buco.
for the veal shanks, but
then you might want to use       Of course, you can also serve the shanks over pasta or plain rice if you don’t
red wine instead of white in     feel like making the risotto—but it’s really good.
the braising liquid.
                                         All you need with this is a green salad, maybe with a bit of cheese, and
                                 you’ve got a fantastic meal.
BUTCHERSPEAK

Since a lot of ﬂavor comes
                                         3 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
from the marrow in the
center of the shanks, you                Six 8- to 12-ounce veal foreshanks (or substitute hind shanks)
want to get shanks with                  Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
nice, soft, creamy marrow.               2 large onions, peeled and diced large
If they’re not packaged in
                                         6 ripe plum tomatoes, peeled, quartered, and seeded
cellophane, press the
centers to be sure they                  1 head garlic, peeled and minced
are soft.                                2 cups dry white wine
                                         About 1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)

                                         F O R T H E P O W E R PA C K

                                         2 teaspoons minced garlic
                                         2 teaspoons ﬁnely grated orange zest
                                         1 teaspoon ﬁnely grated lemon zest
                                         2 teaspoons ﬁnely chopped anchovy ﬁllets (optional)
                                         1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped salted pistachios

                                         FOR TH E R I SOTTO

                                         5 cups chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                         6 tablespoons (3 ⁄4 stick) unsalted butter
                                         2 small onions, peeled and diced small



182            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1 pound pumpkin or other winter squash, peeled, seeded, and diced
         medium (about 4 cups)
      2 teaspoons minced garlic
      2 cups arborio rice
      1 cup dry white wine or dry vermouth
      1⁄ 2   cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

      2. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other heavy ovenproof pot with a
lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.
Dry the shanks with paper towels and sprinkle generously with salt and
pepper. Add them to the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to
avoid crowding, and cook until well browned on all sides, about 15 min­
utes total; transfer the shanks to a platter as they are done.
      3. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 3 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions and cook, stirring occa­
sionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the tomatoes and garlic
and cook, stirring, for 5 minutes more. Pour in the wine and bring to a sim­
mer, stirring to dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pot.
      4. Return the shanks to the pot and add enough stock to come
halfway up the sides of the shanks. Bring to a simmer and skim any scum
off the surface, then cover the pot, place it in the oven, and cook until the
meat is tender and comes easily off the bone, about 2 hours.
      5. While the shanks are cooking, combine the power pack ingredi­
ents in a small bowl and mix well, then cover and refrigerate until serving
time.
       6. When the shanks have been cooking for about 11 ⁄ 2 hours, begin
making the risotto: In a small saucepan, bring the stock to a boil over
medium-high heat, then reduce the heat to low and keep at a simmer. In a
large sauté pan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the onions and
pumpkin and cook, stirring occasionally, until the onions are translucent, 7
to 9 minutes. Add the garlic and cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Add the rice,
stirring to coat with the butter, and cook until the rice just begins to color,
3 to 4 minutes. Add the wine and then the simmering stock 1⁄ 2 cup at a
time, stirring very frequently until all the liquid is absorbed each time
before adding more. It should take 25 to 30 minutes to add all of the liquid.
Remove the pan from the heat and stir in the Parmesan cheese. Season
with salt and pepper.




                                                   VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   183
                                      7. When the shanks are done, remove them from the pot, cover
                                loosely with foil, and set aside. Skim the fat from the cooking liquid. Taste
                                the liquid and, if you think it needs more ﬂavor, place the pot on the stove
                                over medium-high heat and simmer to reduce the liquid. Season with salt
                                and pepper.
                                      8. To serve, place a serving of risotto on each plate, top with a shank,
                                drizzle with the sauce, and sprinkle with the power pack.




THE CUT

See Tomato-Braised Veal
                                EZ–Style Sherry-Braised Veal
Shanks (page 182) for
details about veal shanks.
                                Shank with Raisins and Parsley
                                        S E RVE S 4
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

You can substitute lamb
shanks, and we actually         This is a simple approach to shanks, which works well because it is a very
like this recipe made with      favorable cut in and of itself. To us, the best part of a veal shank is sucking the
beef short ribs too.
                                marrow out of the bones, so make sure you do this. The classic way is to use
                                small-bowled, long-handled spoons that are made just for this purpose and
                                are called (oddly enough) marrow spoons. If you have ice tea spoons, they
                                usually work pretty well–or you can just use a narrow-bladed knife.
                                        Serve this with a side of risotto or pasta and a salad of arugula with
                                blue cheese and olives.

                                        Four 12- to 14-ounce veal hind shanks
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        Flour for dredging
                                        1 ⁄4   cup olive oil, or more if needed
                                        1 large red onion, peeled and diced small
                                        2 carrots, peeled and diced small
                                        2 stalks celery, diced small
                                        1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                        2 plum tomatoes, cored and diced medium
                                        1⁄ 2   cup dark raisins
                                        1 cup sherry
                                        2 tablespoons minced anchovies (optional)
                                        About 2 cups veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley




184           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

      2. Dry the shanks with paper towels, sprinkle them generously with
salt and pepper, and dredge them lightly with the ﬂour, shaking off any
excess. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or a large ovenproof pot with a lid,
heat the oil over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the
shanks in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and
brown well on all sides, about 15 minutes total. Transfer the shanks to a
platter as they are done and set aside.
      3. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onion, carrots, and celery and
cook, stirring occasionally, until the onions are translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.
Add the garlic and tomatoes and cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Add the
raisins and sherry and bring to a simmer, stirring to dissolve the brown
crusty stuff on the bottom of the pan.
      4. Add the veal shanks, along with the anchovies, if using, and
enough stock to come halfway up the sides of the shanks. Bring to a sim­
mer and skim any scum from the surface of the liquid, then place in the
oven and cook until the shanks are tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours. To check for
doneness, plunge a fork straight down into the meat and try to pull the
fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if the meat hangs on
to the fork, give it more time.
      5. When the shanks are done, remove them from the pot, cover
loosely with foil, and set aside. Skim the fat from the cooking liquid. Taste
the liquid, and if you think it needs more ﬂavor, place the pot on the stove
over two burners set at medium-high heat and simmer to reduce the liq­
uid. Stir in the parsley and season with salt and pepper.
      6. Serve the shanks splashed with a generous amount of the braising
liquid, passing any remaining liquid separately.




                                                  VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   185
THE CUT

You can use either the arm
                                  Orange-Braised Veal Shoulder
roast or the blade roast of
veal here. The arm is a
                                  with Sweet-and-Sour Braised
thicker cut, but since this is
veal, it will still be tender.    Cabbage and Fennel Slaw
You might be able to pick
up a veal shoulder roast in               S E RVE S 6

a supermarket, but you’re
likely to get a better-quality    The shoulder of veal is a perfect illustration of a paradox about this meat:
roast at your butcher.
                                  Although it is younger and therefore more tender than beef, veal has more

OTHER NAMES
                                  collagen, the connective tissue that can make older meat tough. This means
For arm roast, veal round         that, when cooked long and slow by a moist-heat method such as braising,
bone roast.                       veal creates a particularly rich, silky liquid.
                                          Here we use a roast from the shoulder for a dish with Alsatian over­
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                  tones that would be great on a cold fall or winter afternoon. Notice that the
Shoulder roasts of lamb,
pork, or beef will work per­
                                  cabbage goes in the oven after the veal has been cooking for about half an
fectly well in this recipe. Or    hour and comes out after one hour even if the veal is not quite done yet.
you can substitute veal                   Serve this with Mashed Potatoes (page 413) or buttered noodles and
shoulder steaks. If you do,
use a roasting pan rather
                                  a nice Alsatian wine.
than a Dutch oven so you
have more surface area.                   2 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
That way, the same amount                 One 4-pound veal shoulder roast
of liquid will still only come            Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
halfway up the sides of the
                                          2 red onions, peeled and diced small
meat.
                                          1 cup dry red wine
                                          2 cups orange juice
                                          1⁄ 2   cup red wine vinegar

                                          F OR TH E CAB BAG E

                                          2 tablespoons olive oil
                                          1 medium head red cabbage, cored and thinly sliced
                                          1⁄ 2   cup red wine vinegar
                                          1 ⁄4   cup sugar
                                          1 ⁄4   cup dark raisins
                                          2 tablespoons caraway seeds
                                          Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                          F OR TH E S LAW

                                          1 cup thinly sliced fennel
                                          1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
                                          1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley




186             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

      2. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot with a
lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.
Dry the veal roast with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with salt
and pepper. Place it in the Dutch oven and brown well on all sides, about 8
minutes per side. Transfer the meat to a platter and set aside.
      3. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions and cook, stirring occa­
sionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the red wine and bring to a
simmer, stirring to dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the
pot, then continue to simmer until the wine is reduced by half, about 10
minutes.
      4. Return the meat to the pot, add the orange juice and vinegar, and
bring to a simmer again. Skim any scum from the surface of the liquid,
then cover the pot, place it in the oven, and braise until the meat is very
tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down
into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the
meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
      5. Meanwhile, make the cabbage: In another Dutch oven or large
ovenproof pot, heat the oil over medium-high heat until hot but not smok­
ing. Add the cabbage and cook, stirring occasionally, until softened, 5 to 7
minutes. Add the vinegar, sugar, raisins, and caraway seeds, season with
salt and pepper, and mix well. Cover and braise along with the meat for its
last hour of cooking. (Be sure to take the cabbage out of the oven after 1
hour even if the meat is not quite done yet.)
    6. While the cabbage and meat are cooking, make the slaw: In a
medium bowl, combine the fennel, lemon juice, and parsley and mix well.
       7. When the meat is done, remove it from the pot, cover it loosely
with foil, and set it aside. Skim the fat from the braising liquid, then taste
it. If it needs more ﬂavor, place the pot on the stove over medium-high
heat and simmer to reduce the liquid. Season with salt and pepper.
      8. To serve, slice the veal into slices about 1 inch thick. Place a bed of
braised cabbage on each plate, top with several slices of veal, and drizzle
generously with the braising liquid; pass the remaining braising liquid and
the slaw separately.




                                                   VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   187
                                 RECIPES FOR
                                 SMALL TENDER CUTS OF VEAL

10 STEPS TO GREAT GRILLED        Seared Veal Tenderloins over Watercress and Walnuts with
VEAL
                                 Blue Cheese–Madeira Sauce
 1. Build a two-level ﬁre
    using hardwood               Hazelnut-Crusted Veal Tenderloin with Roasted Grapes
    charcoal.
                                 and Port
 2. Wait for the ﬂames to
    die down and the coals       Broiled Veal Loin Chop with Exotic Mushrooms, Bacon,
    to be covered with           and Sherry
    gray ash.
                                 Grilled Veal Loin Chops with Spicy Green Olive and Sun-Dried
 3. Check the temperature
    of the ﬁre.                  Tomato Relish

 4. Dry the meat well.           Simple Grilled Veal Rib Chops with Smoky Portobello Relish
 5. Season the meat well.
                                 Grilled Veal Shoulder Chops with Nectarine-Ginger Chutney
 6. Sear the meat over a         and Cucumbers with Mint and Yogurt
    hot ﬁre.
                                 Grilled Veal T-Bones with a Hobo Pack of Fig, Prosciutto,
 7. Move the meat to the
    cooler part of the ﬁre if    and Spinach
    it needs to cook more
    slowly (don’t use the        Sautéed Medallions of Veal with Artichoke Hearts, Lemon,
    cover).                      and Thyme
 8. Flip the meat only once
                                 Paillard of Veal with Pancetta, White Mushrooms, and
    during cooking.
                                 Madeira
 9. Check for doneness
    early and often (nick,       Spicy Pan-Seared Veal Loin Medallions with Anchovies and
    peek, and cheat).
                                 Green Olives
10. Remove the meat from
    the heat, cover with foil    Panfried Veal Cutlets in the German Style
    and allow it to rest, then
    serve it up.                 Veal Birdies Tidewater-Style, with Smithfield Ham, Backfin
                                 Crab, and Lemon-Caper Sauce




188
            Mango-Stuffed Veal Birdies with Cognac–Green      10 STEPS TO GREAT SAUTÉED
                                                              VEAL
                                         Peppercorn Sauce
                                                               1. Use a big heavy sauté
                Veal Stir-fry on Big Fried Polenta Croutons       pan.

                                                               2. Dry the meat well.
   Grilled Veal, Sweet Potato, and Red Onion Kebabs in the
                                              Piccata Style    3. Season the meat well.

                                                               4. Use only a small
Grilled Veal Flank Steak on Texas Toast with Yellow Tomato
                                                                  amount of oil.
                             Chutney and Balsamic Raisins
                                                               5. Get the pan and the
                                                                  oil hot.

                                                               6. Don’t overcrowd the
                                                                  meat in the pan.

                                                               7. Sear the meat.

                                                               8. Flip the meat only once
                                                                  while cooking.

                                                               9. Check for doneness
                                                                  early and often (nick,
                                                                  peek, and cheat).

                                                              10. Remove the meat from
                                                                  the heat, cover with
                                                                  foil, and allow to rest,
                                                                  then serve.

                                                              10 STEPS TO GREAT BROILED
                                                              VEAL

                                                                 Check out sautéing:
                                                                 The steps are the same
                                                                 except you use a
                                                                 broiler pan instead of a
                                                                 sauté pan, preheat the
                                                                 broiler instead of get­
                                                                 ting the oil hot, and
                                                                 skip the searing step.




                                                                                       189
THE CUT

See Hazelnut-Crusted Veal
                                Seared Veal Tenderloins over
Tenderloin (page 192) for
details on the veal tender­
                                Watercress and Walnuts with Blue
loin and how to buy it. For
this cut, you probably need     Cheese–Madeira Sauce
to call your butcher and
have him order it for you.              S E RVE S 4



OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE          This dish is all about richness. You’ve got the rich veal, the rich blue cheese,
You can substitute bone­        and the rich, sweet Madeira wine. But don’t be put off—it is a fantastic com­
less veal chops in this
                                bination.
recipe, or you can go with
pork tenderloins.                       A key to this dish is lightly browning the veal tenderloin in a sauté pan,
                                then transferring it to the oven to ﬁnish cooking. This is actually very similar to
                                a classic grilling technique in which you sear meat over a hot ﬁre, then move
                                it to a slow ﬁre to ﬁnish cooking. That way, you get good ﬂavor on the outside
                                of the meat but don’t overcook the inside.
                                        We like this dish as a high-class lunch, served with simple steamed
                                green beans and roasted sweet potatoes or squash.

                                        2 veal tenderloins, about 1 pound each
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        3 tablespoons olive oil
                                        1⁄ 2   red onion, peeled and diced small
                                        1⁄ 2   cup semi-dry Madeira (or substitute dry red wine)
                                        1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                        1 ⁄4   cup crumbled blue cheese of your choice
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley

                                        F O R T H E W AT E R C R E S S
                                        1⁄ 3   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                        2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        2 small bunches watercress, trimmed, washed, and dried
                                        1 ⁄4   cup chopped walnuts, toasted in a dry skillet over medium heat, shaking
                                               frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes


                                        1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

                                      2. Dry the tenderloins with paper towels and sprinkle generously
                                with salt and pepper. In a sauté pan large enough to hold the two tender­
                                loins comfortably, heat 2 tablespoons of the oil over medium-high heat
                                until hot but not smoking. Add the tenderloins to the pan and brown well
                                on all sides, 12 to 15 minutes total.



190           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      3. Transfer the meat to a small roasting pan, place in the oven, and         COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

roast to an internal temperature of 130°F for medium-rare, 12 to 15 min­           On the unlikely chance that
                                                                                   you have any of this dish
utes. (Or nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of
                                                                                   left over, put the veal on
the meat; it should be slightly less done than you like it.) Remove from the       thin slices of bread, add
pan, cover loosely with foil, and allow to rest for 10 minutes before slicing.     some of the sauce, and
                                                                                   you’ve got some very
      4. Meanwhile, return the sauté pan to medium-high heat, add the              classy open-faced veal
remaining 1 tablespoon oil, and heat until hot but not smoking. Add the            sandwiches.
onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.
Add the Madeira and cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Add the stock, bring to a
simmer, and simmer until it is reduced by about half, 10 to 15 minutes.
Remove the sauce from the heat, skim any scum off the surface, and stir in
the blue cheese, parsley, and salt and pepper to taste. Set aside, covered to
keep the sauce warm.
      5. In a small bowl, whisk together the extra virgin olive oil, lemon
juice, and salt and pepper. Toss the watercress and walnuts with the dress­
ing and divide the salad among four plates.
       6. Slice the veal on the bias into slices about 1 inch thick. Place a few
slices on top of each serving of watercress, drizzle generously with the
sauce, and serve.




                                                   VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                    191
THE CUT

With veal, as with beef, the
                                 Hazelnut-Crusted Veal Tenderloin
tenderloin is a unique cut,
the most tender part of the
                                 with Roasted Grapes and Port
animal. Since veal is all
about tenderness, you                    S E RVE S 4

might say that this is the
quintessential cut of veal,      As we often do with veal, we are playing rich with rich here, avoiding intense
probably the single most
                                 ﬂavors that might overpower the delicate meat. But that doesn’t mean this
tender cut of meat in the
world. This is deﬁnitely a       dish is meek or mild. With the discreet bite of mustard, the richness of the
butcher shop item, and he        hazelnuts, the herby thyme, and the sweetness of the roasted grapes, there is
will probably have to order
                                 plenty going on here.
it for you in advance, so
give him a call a couple of              You can roast the grapes well ahead of time, then cover and refrigerate
days before you plan to          them until you’re ready to cook the dish. But beware—they are like little pieces
cook.
                                 of soft grape candy, and you run the risk of eating them all before you make
                                 the dish. Also, be careful not to overbrown this dish, because you may burn
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

You can use boneless veal        the nut crust.
chops in this recipe. The                We might serve this with Parsleyed New Potatoes (page 412) and
best substitute, though, is      some sautéed mushrooms or broccoli.
pork tenderloin.
                                         2 cups seedless red grapes
                                         2 veal tenderloins, about 1 pound each
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         1⁄ 3   cup grainy mustard
                                         1⁄ 3   cup hazelnuts, lightly toasted in a dry skillet over medium heat, shaken
                                                frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes, and ground (or substitute
                                                pecans)
                                         3 tablespoons fresh thyme leaves (or 11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons dried thyme)
                                         2 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                         1 tablespoon olive oil
                                         1⁄ 2   red onion, peeled and diced small
                                         1⁄ 2   cup port wine
                                         1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                         1 ⁄4   cup balsamic vinegar


                                         1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

                                       2. Place the grapes on a very lightly greased small rimmed baking
                                 sheet and roast until shrunken and caramelized but not burned, 45 min­
                                 utes to 1 hour. Remove from the oven and set aside. (Leave the oven on.)
                                       3. Meanwhile, dry the tenderloins with paper towels, sprinkle them
                                 generously with salt and pepper, and rub them all over with the mustard.
                                 In a small bowl, combine the hazelnuts and thyme and mix well, then coat



192            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
the tenderloins with this mixture. In an ovenproof sauté pan large enough
to hold the 2 tenderloins comfortably, melt the butter over medium heat.
Add the tenderloins and brown on all sides, about 10 minutes total. (You
are looking for a golden brown here, not a dark brown, because of the nut-
herb coating.)
      4. Place the pan in the oven and cook the veal to an internal temper­
ature of 130°F for medium-rare, 13 to 18 minutes. (Or nick, peek, and
cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it should be
slightly less done than you like it.) Transfer the tenderloins to a platter and
cover loosely with foil.
       5. Pour any drippings out of the pan and wipe it clean with paper
towels. Return the pan to the stove over medium-high heat, add the olive
oil, and heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and cook, stirring
occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the port and cook, stir­
ring frequently, for 1 minute. Add the veal stock and vinegar, bring to a
simmer, and continue to simmer until the sauce is reduced enough to
lightly coat the back of a spoon, 10 to 15 minutes. Season with salt and
pepper and add the grapes, tossing to coat them with the sauce.
      6. Slice the tenderloin on the bias into slices about 1 inch thick and
serve topped with the grape-port sauce.




                                                  VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   193
THE CUT

There are several options
                                 Broiled Veal Loin Chop with
when it comes to veal
chops, but for this dish, our
                                 Exotic Mushrooms, Bacon, and
recommendation is the
bone-in top loin chop. If        Sherry
this were beef, it would be
the bone-in strip loin steak,            S E RVE S 4

a.k.a. New York steak.
Another good option is the       You’re never going to go wrong with mushrooms and veal. In fact, if you were
veal loin chop, which is the
equivalent of the beef
                                 to research what other food veal has been most combined with in the history
porterhouse steak.               of human eating, we would take any bets that it would be mushrooms. When­
  You may be able to ﬁnd         ever we have veal and mushrooms together, we think of our friend Gordon
these in some of your bet­
ter supermarkets, but to
                                 Hamersley and his combination of mushrooms, bacon, and sherry in the justly
get them this thick, you will    famed mushroom sandwich he serves at Hamersley’s Bistro in Boston. So
probably have to go to the       this dish is our tribute to Gordon. With no cream and not too much butter,
butcher.
                                 this is actually a little less heavy and rich than many veal dishes.

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                         We like this with orzo or buttered fettuccine and Brussels Sprouts in
Any type of veal chop,           Brown Butter (page 428).
whether from the loin or
                                         FOR THE MUSHROOMS
the rib, boneless or bone-
in, would be excellent in                4 slices bacon, diced small
this recipe. Pork loin chops             1 red onion, peeled and diced small
are also great.
                                         3 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                         2 pounds assorted exotic mushrooms of your choice (portobello, shiitake,
                                            cremini, chanterelles, enoki, etc., or substitute white mushrooms),
                                            trimmed and thinly sliced
                                         1⁄ 3   cup dry sherry
                                         1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                         1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh oregano (or substitute 2 tablespoons dried)
                                         3 tablespoons olive oil
                                         Four 10- to 12-ounce veal loin chops, 1 to 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick


                                         1. Preheat the broiler on the highest setting.

                                        2. In a large sauté pan, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until
                                 crisp, 6 to 8 minutes. Transfer the bacon to a small bowl and pour off all
                                 but 2 tablespoons fat from the pan.
                                        3. Add the onion to the pan and cook, stirring occasionally, until
                                 golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the onions to the bacon and set
                                 aside.


194            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      4. Pour any remaining bacon grease out of the pan, then melt the
butter in the pan over medium heat. Add the mushrooms and cook, stir­
ring occasionally, until they are moist throughout, 10 to 13 minutes (peek
inside one to check). Add the sherry, bacon, and onions and continue
cooking for 1 minute. Remove from the heat and toss with the parsley and
salt and pepper.
      5. In a small bowl, combine the garlic, oregano, and olive oil and mix
well. Dry the chops with paper towels, coat them well with this mixture,
and season them generously with salt and pepper. Place on a broiling pan
and broil 3 inches from the heat source until well seared on one side, 5 to
6 minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the desired doneness, 5 to 6 min­
utes more for medium-rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat:
Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less
done than you like it.
    6. Allow the chops to rest for 5 to 10 minutes, then top with the
mushroom sauce and serve.




                                                   VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   195
THE CUT

See Broiled Veal Loin Chop
                                Grilled Veal Loin Chops with
(page 194) for details
about veal loin chops and
                                Spicy Green Olive and Sun-Dried
how to get what you want
when you buy them.              Tomato Relish
                                        S E RVE S 4
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Any veal chop, including
the shoulder chop, would        The spicy relish we use here is a bit of a challenge to the veal, but these
be great here. Thick pork       chops do have the texture to stand up to it. As always, remember that when
chops would also do the
                                grilling tender, subtle veal, you want to use a somewhat cooler ﬁre and grill
trick.
                                for less time than when you are cooking beef, lamb, or even pork.
                                        If you don’t have any sun-dried tomatoes, you can substitute a couple
                                of ripe plum tomatoes in the relish. To get a bit deeper ﬂavor, though, try
                                grilling them for 3 to 4 minutes along the edge of the ﬁre before you chop
                                them and add them to the relish.
                                        This dish is great with buttered pasta or risotto as a starch and an
                                Autumn Vegetable Hobo Pack (page 443).

                                        FOR THE RELISH
                                        1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped pitted green olives
                                        5 oil-packed sun-dried tomatoes, roughly chopped
                                        1 ⁄4   cup golden raisins
                                        1 to 3 teaspoons red pepper ﬂakes
                                        1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh basil
                                        1 ⁄4   cup pine nuts, toasted in a dry skillet over medium heat, shaken
                                               frequently, until just fragrant, 5 to 7 minutes
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                        Four 10- to 12-ounce veal loin chops, 1 to 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                        1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

                                      2. Make the relish: In a medium bowl, combine all the relish ingredi­
                                ents and mix well; set aside.
                                       3. Dry the veal loins well with paper towels, then sprinkle them gen­
                                erously with salt and pepper. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals
                                are medium-hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface
                                for 2 to 3 seconds), place the veal on the grill and cook until well seared on
                                one side, 4 to 5 minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the desired done-



196           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
ness, 8 to 10 minutes total cooking time for medium-rare. To check for
doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of
the meat; it should be slightly less done than you like it. Remove the meat
from the grill and allow it to rest for about 5 minutes.
      4. To serve, top each chop with a tablespoon or two of the relish and
serve, passing the remaining relish on the side.




Simple Grilled Veal Rib Chops                                                     THE CUT

                                                                                  The veal rib chop, a very

with Smoky Portobello Relish                                                      tender cut that also has
                                                                                  wonderful ﬂavor, comes
                                                                                  from the same place in the
      S E RVE S 4                                                                 veal calf as the Delmonico
                                                                                  or rib-eye steak in a cow.
Veal chops are meaty, ﬂavorful, and tender, making them perhaps the single        Because it is presently
                                                                                  undergoing a bout of popu­
most popular cut of veal right now. We like them for all those reasons, plus      larity in restaurants around
the fact that they are hearty enough to stand up to grilling, unlike many other   the country, you should be
cuts of veal. Portobello mushrooms also are particularly nice on the grill,       able to ﬁnd this chop in
                                                                                  most supermarkets.
because their size makes them easy to maneuver and because they really go
well with the smoky ﬂavor that grilling imparts. In fact, grilled portobellos
                                                                                  OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
almost taste like meat themselves. So we grill them up and make them into a       Any veal loin chop would
simple but tasty relish to go with the classic grilled veal chop.                 work well here, as would
                                                                                  pork loin chops.
      Again, you don’t want to brown veal as deeply as you would beef. You
are looking to get a nice sear on it, but it doesn’t require the overall deep,
dark brown surface that is needed to bring out the ﬂavors of a piece of beef.
      Serve this with Butternut Squash Hobo Packs (page 442) and Mashed
Potatoes (page 413) or Hash Browns (page 412).

      Four 12-ounce veal rib chops, about 1 inch thick
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      FOR THE RELISH

      1 pound portobello mushroom caps
      1⁄ 3   cup olive oil
      1 tablespoon minced garlic
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      1 large tomato (the size of a baseball), diced medium
      1⁄ 3   cup balsamic vinegar
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh marjoram (or substitute oregano)



                                                      VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                 197
                                          1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

                                        2. Dry the chops with paper towels and sprinkle them generously
                                  with salt and pepper. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are
                                  medium-hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3
                                  to 4 seconds), place the chops on the grill and cook until well seared on
                                  one side, about 5 minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the desired done-
                                  ness, 5 to 7 minutes more for medium-rare. To check for doneness, nick,
                                  peek and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it
                                  should be slightly less done than you like it. Remove from the heat, cover
                                  loosely with foil, and allow to rest for 5 minutes.
                                         3. Meanwhile, as soon as the chops go on the grill, coat the mush­
                                  room caps with the olive oil and garlic, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
                                  place on the grill around the edges of the ﬁre, where the heat is medium.
                                  Grill for 5 to 7 minutes per side, until the mushrooms are tender but not
                                  mushy, and moist throughout. Remove from the grill, dice medium, and
                                  place in a medium bowl. Add the tomato, vinegar, and marjoram, mix
                                  well, and season with salt and pepper.
                                          4. Serve the chops accompanied by the relish.




THE CUT

Although this cut is techni­
                                  Grilled Veal Shoulder Chops with
cally a shoulder steak, you
will most often ﬁnd it
                                  Nectarine-Ginger Chutney and
labeled as a chop. Most
likely this is simply             Cucumbers with Mint and Yogurt
because it is easier to sell
that way—many more                        S E RVE S 4

cooks have heard of veal
chops than veal steaks. So        Here we’re pushing the limits of the subtle ﬂavor of veal. But pushing limits
that’s what we’re going to
call it too. In any case, it is   usually ends up being a lot of fun, so why not? In this dish, we use some rel­
a cut from the blade sec­         atively strong ﬂavors from the Indian ﬂavor footprint, so we match them with
tion of the shoulder of the       veal shoulder chops, which have a little bolder ﬂavor than the loin and rib
veal, which means it will
have some connective tis­         chops. The sweet and pungent chutney is a wonderful contrast to the veal,
sue and therefore be a bit        while the slightly tangy yogurt sauce adds another level of ﬂavor.
tougher than the better-                  Try serving this with grilled eggplant and the rice of your choice.
known cuts of veal. As
usual, though, this gives it              FOR THE CHUTNEY
a bit deeper ﬂavor.
                                          2 tablespoons olive oil
                                          1 red onion, peeled and diced medium
                                          1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced medium




198             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger                                            OTHER NAMES

      4 nectarines, pitted and cut into eighths (or substitute peaches or plums)   Veal shoulder blade steak.
      1 cup cider vinegar
      1⁄ 2                                                                         OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
             cup packed brown sugar
                                                                                   Veal shoulder arm steak is
      Pinch of ground allspice
                                                                                   a perfect substitute here.
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                        Since this dish has some
                                                                                   strong ﬂavors, you could
      FOR THE CUCUMBER
                                                                                   also substitute pork chops
      1 cucumber, peeled, seeded, and diced large                                  or even lamb shoulder
      1⁄ 2   cup plain yogurt                                                      chops.
      1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh mint


      Four 10-ounce veal shoulder chops, about 3 ⁄4 inch thick
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      3 tablespoons cracked coriander seeds


      1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

       2. Make the chutney: In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-
high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and bell pepper and
cook, stirring occasionally, until the onion is translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.
Add the ginger and nectarines and cook, stirring frequently, for another 3
minutes. Add the vinegar, brown sugar, allspice, and salt and pepper and
bring to a simmer. Reduce the heat to medium-low and simmer until the
chutney begins to thicken, 15 to 20 minutes. Remove from the heat and set
aside.
     3. Meanwhile, in a medium bowl, combine the cucumber, yogurt,
and mint and mix well; cover and refrigerate until ready to serve.
      4. Dry the chops with paper towels, sprinkle them generously with
salt and pepper, and rub them all over with the cracked coriander seeds,
pressing gently to be sure they adhere.
      5. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you
can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds),
place the chops on the grill and cook until well seared on one side, 4 to 5
minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the desired doneness, 4 to 5 min­
utes more for medium. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat:
Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less
done than you like it. Remove the chops from the grill and allow to rest for
about 5 minutes.
     6. To serve, top each chop with a couple of tablespoons of the chut­
ney and pass the cucumbers on the side.


                                                    VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                   199
THE CUT

When it comes to beef, we
                                 Grilled Veal T-Bones with a
love T-bones and porter­
houses. So it just makes
                                 Hobo Pack of Fig, Prosciutto,
sense that when it comes
to veal, we love the loin        and Spinach
chops, which correspond to
those two cuts of beef. Just             S E RVE S 4

as with beef, the advantage
is that you get part of the      Italian cooks are even more fond of veal than the French are, and over the
loin muscle and part of the
tenderloin muscle in each
                                 centuries they have come up with plenty of excellent ﬂavor combinations for
chop. You can probably ﬁnd       this tender meat. In this Italian-style dish, we use fresh ﬁgs, sage, and pro­
these chops in some better       sciutto with the veal. We’re not Italian, though, so we put all these accompa­
supermarkets, but to get
them this thick, you may
                                 niments in a hobo pack, then add some spinach and just a bit of coriander, a
well have to go to the           light, perfumey spice that doesn’t overpower the delicate meat.
butcher.                                 If it’s winter and you don’t feel like grilling, you can also sauté or broil
                                 this T-bone.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                         Serve this with risotto and you’re all set.
You can easily substitute
the veal top loin chop,                  F O R T H E H O B O PA C K
which is the same piece of
                                         2 cups trimmed, well washed, and dried spinach
meat without the portion of
tenderloin. If you can ﬁnd it,           4 ounces thinly sliced prosciutto
the veal kidney chop, which              6 fresh ﬁgs, halved
is a loin chop with a sec­
                                         1 large tomato (about the size of a baseball), cored and diced medium
tion of the kidney left
attached to it, is also excel­           1 tablespoon minced garlic
lent. Veal rib chops are also            1⁄ 3   cup extra virgin olive oil
ﬁne for this treatment, but              15 fresh sage leaves
they may not need to cook
as long. If veal chops are
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
not around, pork loin chops
also work well here.                     Four 12-ounce veal loin chops, about 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         3 tablespoons cracked coriander seeds (or 1 teaspoon ground coriander)


                                         1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

                                       2. Make the hobo pack: Tear off four sheets of heavy-duty foil, each
                                 about 2 feet long, and stack them one on top of the other. In a large bowl,
                                 combine all the hobo pack ingredients and toss gently to combine. Place this
                                 mixture in the center of the top sheet of foil, then fold up the sheets of foil
                                 around the ingredients, one after the other, turning the package one quarter
                                 turn between each sheet and making sure that each sheet is well sealed.
                                      3. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you
                                 can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds),



200            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
place the hobo pack on the outside periphery of the coals, where the ﬁre is
less intense. Pile the coals around them and cook for about 20 minutes.
      4. Meanwhile, dry the veal chops with paper towels, sprinkle them
generously with salt and pepper, and coat them well with the coriander,
pressing gently so it adheres. Place the chops on the grill and cook until
well seared on one side, 5 to 7 minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the
desired doneness, 5 to 7 minutes more for medium-rare. To check for
doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of
the meat; it should be slightly less done than you like it.
      5. Allow the chops to rest for about 5 minutes while you open the
hobo pack and divide the contents among four plates. Top each plate with
a veal chop and serve.




Sautéed Medallions of Veal with                                                  THE CUT

                                                                                 Generally, veal medallions

Artichoke Hearts, Lemon, and                                                     come from the leg, which is
                                                                                 called the round, and there

Thyme                                                                            are a lot of choices for the
                                                                                 particular cut. (You can
                                                                                 also get medallions from
      S E RVE S 4                                                                the loin, but to us that
                                                                                 seems somewhat of a
A medallion of veal is one of those cuts for which sautéing was invented. Ten­   waste; you might as well
                                                                                 save that more expensive
der enough to cook through quickly, it responds perfectly to this high-heat      cut for thicker pieces.) The
approach. So we feature them in this very simple, straightforward dish full of   best choices for medallions
ﬂavors from the northern shores of the Mediterranean. If you want to make a      are any cuts from the top,
                                                                                 bottom, or tip sections of
fancy dinner in a hurry, make this recipe using the canned artichoke heart       the round.
option. And don’t be afraid of the pan sauce in this or any of the other veal
recipes. Making the sauce is actually very simple—just taste and reduce, taste
and reduce, and add a bit of salt and pepper at the end. Once you get the
hang of it, you’ll be a regular French chef.
      We might serve this with Simple Rice Pilaf (page 417) and Quick-
Sautéed Spinach with Garlic (page 427).




                                                  VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                    201
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                   8 baby artichokes (or substitute 12 canned artichoke hearts)
You can make medallions                  1 lemon, halved and seeded
from the boneless veal sir­
                                         2 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
loin steak, which will be
slightly tougher but also a              11 ⁄ 2 pounds boneless veal leg, cut into 8 medallions about 1 ⁄ 2 inch thick
bit more ﬂavorful. If you                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
want to be really bold (and              1⁄ 2   red onion, peeled and ﬁnely chopped
spend more money), you
                                         1 teaspoon minced garlic
can pound veal tenderloin
steak into medallions. Or                1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
try pork tenderloin in this              1⁄ 2   cup dry white wine or white vermouth
application.
                                         2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, cut into pieces (optional)
                                         2 tablespoons fresh thyme (or 1 tablespoon dried thyme)
BUTCHERSPEAK
                                         2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh parsley
Just ask your butcher for
medallions from the top,
bottom, or tip of the veal             1. Prepare the artichokes (if using canned artichoke hearts, skip to
leg and you’ll be getting        Step 3): Trim the stems and snap off the coarse outer leaves, then cut 1
the right meat.
                                 inch off the tops of each one; rub the cut areas immediately with one of
                                 the lemon halves. Quarter each artichoke and remove the hairy-looking
                                 choke from each quarter. Transfer to a bowl of water, along with the used
                                 lemon half.
                                       2. Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil over high heat. Add the
                                 artichokes, reduce the heat to low, and simmer until they are tender, 15 to
                                 20 minutes. Drain, cool in a bowl of ice water, and drain again. Set aside.
                                        3. In a large sauté pan, heat the olive oil over medium-high heat until
                                 it is hot but not smoking. Dry the veal medallions with paper towels and
                                 sprinkle generously with salt and pepper. Add the medallions to the pan,
                                 in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and sauté until they are just
                                 nicely browned, 3 to 4 minutes per side; transfer the medallions to a plat­
                                 ter as they are done.
                                       4. When all the medallions have been cooked, pour off the fat or add
                                 oil to the pan as needed so you have a total of about 2 tablespoons in the
                                 pan. Add the onion and cook over medium-high heat, stirring occasionally,
                                 until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic and cook, stirring, for 1
                                 minute more. Add the stock and wine, squeeze the juice from the remain­
                                 ing lemon half into the pan, turn the heat to high, and bring to a boil.
                                 Skim any scum from the surface of the liquid and simmer vigorously until
                                 reduced by half, 10 to 12 minutes. Reduce the heat and, if using the butter,
                                 swirl it into the sauce bit by bit, keeping the sauce at a gentle simmer.
                                       5. Add the veal medallions, along with any accumulated juices, thyme,
                                 parsley, and artichokes to the sauce and season to taste. Leave on the heat for
                                 just 1 minute, then serve the veal topped with the sauce and artichokes.



202            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Paillard of Veal with Pancetta,                                                    THE CUT

                                                                                   See Sautéed Medallions of

White Mushrooms, and Madeira                                                       Veal (page 201) for details
                                                                                   on the veal leg, which is
                                                                                   called the round, and how
      S E RVE S 4                                                                  to choose cuts from this
                                                                                   section of the animal.
A paillard is essentially a slightly bigger version of a cutlet. We’re using the
term here just so you can make your guests feel that you’re serving them a
fancy dish, even though it’s really quite easy to make.
      Sometimes we think that the ﬂavor of veal is a little too subtle, so we
like to add some deeper tastes to it with ingredients such as bacon. In this
case, we use pancetta, a very tasty Italian bacon that is cured with salt and
spices but not smoked. It gives you some great pan drippings to use in mak­
ing a sauce that adds an extra layer of subtle but enriched ﬂavor to the veal.
      Serve this with buttered noodles and some seared greens from the
slightly bitter camp, such as beet greens or chard; the edge of bitterness
cuts through the richness of this dish nicely.

      6 ounces pancetta, diced small (or substitute bacon)
      8 ounces small white mushrooms, trimmed and quartered
      1 teaspoon minced garlic
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      1 ⁄4   cup dry white wine
      2 pounds veal top round, cut into 8 large slices and lightly pounded to a
         1 ⁄4-inch thickness

      Flour for dredging
      Olive oil as needed
      1⁄ 2   cup dry Madeira
      1⁄ 2   cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 lemon)
      3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh parsley


      1. In a large sauté pan, cook the pancetta over medium-low heat, stir­
ring frequently, until it is crisp and brown, about 7 minutes. Transfer the
pancetta to paper towels to drain and pour all but 2 tablespoons of the ren­
dered fat into a small bowl.
       2. Increase the heat to medium-high, add the mushrooms to the pan,
and cook, stirring occasionally, until the juices have evaporated and the
mushrooms are golden brown, 8 to 10 minutes. Add the garlic and cook,
stirring, for 1 minute more. Season with salt and pepper and transfer the
mushrooms to a bowl. Add the pancetta and cover to keep warm.



                                                       VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                203
                              3. Add the wine to the pan and bring to a simmer, stirring to dissolve
                        the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan. Pour this liquid into the
                        bowl with the mushrooms and pancetta, then wipe out the skillet with a
                        paper towel.
                              4. Dry the veal slices well with paper towels and sprinkle them gen­
                        erously with salt and pepper. Dredge each slice lightly in ﬂour, shaking off
                        the excess. In the same sauté pan, heat the reserved pancetta fat with
                        enough olive oil to reach a depth of 1⁄4 inch over medium-high heat. When
                        the fat is very hot but not smoking, add the veal to the pan in a single layer,
                        in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and cook until golden brown, 1
                        to 2 minutes per side: transfer the pieces to a platter as they are done.
                        Cover the veal to keep warm while you prepare the sauce.
                              5. In the same sauté pan, bring the Madeira and stock to a boil over
                        high heat, stirring and scraping up any brown bits in the bottom of the
                        pan. Reduce the heat to medium-low and simmer until the liquid is
                        reduced by half, 10 to 12 minutes. Skim any scum from the surface, then
                        add the lemon juice along with the sautéed pancetta and mushrooms, and
                        any juices that have accumulated on the veal platter. Cook for 1 minute
                        more. Remove the sauce from the heat, add the parsley, and season with
                        salt and pepper.
                                6. Spoon the sauce over the veal and serve immediately.




204   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Spicy Pan-Seared Veal Loin                                                           THE CUT

                                                                                     See Honey-and-Bourbon-

Medallions with Anchovies and                                                        Glazed Roasted Loin of
                                                                                     Veal (page 170) for details

Green Olives                                                                         on the veal loin and how to
                                                                                     get what you want when
                                                                                     you buy it.
         S E RVE S 4

                                                                                     OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
Now, some of you may be asking, “How come this recipe is in the ‘Small Ten-          You can easily make this
der’ section, when we start out with a two-and-a-half-pound hunk of veal             recipe using medallions
                                                                                     from the veal leg. Just rub
loin?” We have an answer: Because in this case, you’re going to be the
                                                                                     the spice mixture over the
butcher. You start out with a nice piece of boneless veal loin, spike it with a      the medallions. Pork loin
ﬂavorful spice mixture, and then cut it into medallions and pan-sear it. We          will also work perfectly
                                                                                     well.
think this actually makes it a bit more fun, plus it’s a good way to make sure
that your medallions are from the loin, not the leg, and that they are nice and
thick.
         Serve this with noodles or Spanish Rice (page 419) and a green salad.

         2 teaspoons fennel seeds
         2 teaspoons coriander seeds
         1 tablespoon black peppercorns
         1 tablespoon red pepper ﬂakes
         2 teaspoons kosher salt, plus more to taste
         1 cup packed fresh basil leaves, plus 2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh
            basil
         1⁄ 2   cup packed fresh oregano leaves
         3 cloves garlic, peeled
         1 teaspoon grated orange zest (orange part only)
         1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
         One 2- to 21 ⁄ 2-pound boneless veal loin
         2 tablespoons vegetable oil
         1⁄ 2   cup red vermouth (or substitute dry red wine)
         1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
         1⁄ 2   cup brine-cured green olives, pitted and quartered
         3 anchovy ﬁllets, roughly chopped
         2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, cut into pieces
         Freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. In a small dry sauté pan, toast the fennel, coriander, and pepper­
corns over medium heat, shaking the pan frequently to keep them from
scorching, until fragrant, about 3 minutes. In a food processor ﬁtted with a
steel blade, combine the toasted spices, red pepper ﬂakes, salt, the cup of



                                                           VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?               205
                                 basil, the oregano, garlic, orange zest, and olive oil and process until
                                 slightly chunky but of a uniform consistency.
                                       2. Dry the veal well with paper towels. Using a paring knife, make 20
                                 or so small slits in the surface of the veal and push some of the spice mix­
                                 ture into each one. Rub any remaining mixture on the surface of the meat.
                                 Cut the loin into 12 medallions about 1 inch thick.
                                        3. In a large sauté pan, heat the vegetable oil over medium-high heat
                                 until very hot but not smoking. Add the medallions, in batches if neces­
                                 sary to avoid crowding, and sauté until deep golden brown on each side, 2
                                 to 3 minutes per side; transfer the medallions to a platter as they are done
                                 and cover loosely with foil. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat:
                                 Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in a medallion; it should be slightly less done than you
                                 like it.
                                        4. When all the medallions are browned, add the vermouth and
                                 stock to the pan and bring to a simmer, stirring to dissolve the brown
                                 crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan. Continue to simmer until the liquid
                                 is reduced by half, about 10 minutes. Add the olives and anchovies, then
                                 stir in the butter piece by piece to incorporate it well. Season with salt and
                                 pepper, remove from the heat, and stir in the chopped basil.
                                         5. Pour the sauce over the medallions and serve immediately.




THE CUT

When you’re planning to
                                 Panfried Veal Cutlets in the
cook a piece of meat that
needs to be cubed or
                                 German Style
sliced and pounded, it is
very often a good idea to                S E RVE S 4

buy the cut and do the
work yourself. That way,         A lot of the veal consumed in this world is prepared very much like this, and
you can be sure you get
the cut you are looking for.
                                 there’s a good reason for that: It’s delicious. This is the classic schnitzel, also
But veal cutlets are almost      known as Veal Française, which we felt we had to include in this book or it
always made from the leg         simply would not be complete.
(also called the round)
because it is cheaper than
                                         Putting the breading on the cutlet is not complicated, but it does
the loin and easier to cut       require that you be organized and systematic so you get an even coat and
into cutlets than the shoul­     don’t make a mess. Lots of waxed paper on the counter is a good idea. Also,
der. So this is one time
when it is simply best to let
                                 notice that breaded meat requires more fat than plain sautéed meat; the fat
the butcher do the work for      should come almost halfway up the sides of the cutlets. And, ﬁnally, be sure
you. This cut is often avail­    you get the butter nice and brown, but don’t let it go over the end into burned
able in supermarkets too.
                                 territory.


206            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     Serve this with buttered noodles and applesauce for a real Germanic         OTHER NAME

experience.                                                                      Veal leg cutlets.


     12 veal leg cutlets (about 11 ⁄ 2 pounds)                                   OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                       You can buy any cut from
                                                                                 the leg (see Sautéed
     Flour for dredging (about 11 ⁄ 2 cups)
                                                                                 Medallions of Veal, page
     4 large eggs, lightly beaten with 2 tablespoons milk                        201, for details) and form
     2 cups ﬁne dry bread crumbs                                                 the cutlets yourself. Cutlets
     1⁄ 2   cup olive oil                                                        of pork tenderloin are also
                                                                                 ﬁne.
     4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter
     1 lemon, quartered and seeded
     2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh parsley


       1. Place each cutlet between two pieces of waxed paper and pound
with a meat mallet or other heavy blunt object such as a small frying pan
to a 1⁄ 2-inch thickness. Dry the cutlets well with paper towels and season
them generously with salt and pepper. Dredge each cutlet lightly with the
ﬂour, then dip in the egg mixture and then in the bread crumbs to coat.
Place the breaded cutlets on a cake rack set over waxed paper and let them
dry at room temperature for 15 minutes.
      2. In a large heavy sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-high heat
until hot but not smoking. Add the veal in a single layer, in batches if nec­
essary to avoid crowding, and sauté just until nicely browned, 2 to 3 min­
utes per side; transfer the cutlets to a paper towel–lined platter as they are
done and cover to keep warm.
      3. Pour the fat out of the pan, wipe out the pan with paper towels,
then place it back over medium-high heat. Add the butter, swirling the pan
so that it melts evenly. When the butter has reached a nutty golden brown
color, immediately squeeze the lemon juice into the pan. Add the parsley
and season with salt and pepper.
      4. Remove the pan from the heat and pour the brown butter over the
cutlets. Serve immediately.




                                                   VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                   207
THE CUT

Here we are using the veal
                                 Veal Birdies Tidewater-Style, with
leg, or round, and just
about any cut from that
                                 Smithfield Ham, Backfin Crab,
part of the animal will do.
See Sautéed Medallions of        and Lemon-Caper Sauce
Veal (page 201) for more
details on these cuts.                   S E RVE S 4



OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           This is a wonderful dish that looks (and tastes) very fancy but is not really that
You can buy any cut from         hard to make. If you’ve got some guests coming over who you suspect think
the leg (see Sautéed
                                 you’re not that great a cook, serve this and you’ll have them in awe. (If you’re
Medallions of Veal, page
201, for more details) and       wondering about the name of this dish, birdie is a term for a stuffed and rolled
slice the cutlets yourself.      veal scallopine. If you want to get fancy, they are also known as roulades or
Cutlets of pork tenderloin
                                 paupiettes.)
are also ﬁne.
                                         To make this, we take scallopini from the leg of the veal, pound it thin,
                                 and wrap up some crab and Smithﬁeld ham inside it, then sauté it in butter
                                 and ﬁnish up with a lemon-caper sauce. Anyone from the South might recog­
                                 nize this as a Norfolk-style dish, since backﬁn crab and Smithﬁeld ham are a
                                 very common combination in that neck of the woods. This dish also owes
                                 somewhat of a debt to Veal Oscar, a classic in which veal cutlets are topped
                                 with crab and Hollandaise sauce.
                                         Serve this with Hash Browns (page 412), sautéed spinach, and a
                                 green salad with blue cheese dressing.

                                         1⁄ 2   pound backﬁn crabmeat, picked over for shells and cartilage
                                         2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh chervil (or substitute parsley)
                                         Eight 4-ounce slices veal leg
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         8 very thin slices Smithﬁeld ham (or substitute prosciutto)
                                         4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter
                                         3 tablespoons capers, rinsed well
                                         1⁄ 2   lemon
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley


                                         1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

                                      2. In a small bowl, combine the crabmeat and chervil and toss gently.
                                 Cover and refrigerate.
                                        3. Dry the veal with paper towels, then place each slice between two
                                 pieces of waxed paper and, using a meat mallet or other blunt instrument
                                 like a small sauté pan, pound to about a 1⁄4-inch thickness. Sprinkle the veal
                                 slices generously with salt and pepper, then lay 1 slice of ham on top of


208            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
each slice. Top each piece of ham with one eighth of the crab mixture.
Roll up each veal slice into a fat tube and secure with one or more tooth­
picks. If you have time, place the birdies in the refrigerator for 20 minutes;
this will help keep them sealed as they cook.
      4. In a large sauté pan, melt 2 tablespoons of the butter over medium
heat. Add the veal, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and cook
until browned on all sides, 3 to 4 minutes per side; transfer the birdies to an
ovenproof platter as they are done. When all the birdies are browned, turn
off the oven and place the platter in the oven while you prepare the sauce.
      5. Add the capers to the pan and cook, stirring, for 3 minutes. Drain
off the darkened butter, leaving the capers in the pan. Add the remaining 2
tablespoons butter to the pan. When the butter has melted, squeeze the
lemon juice over the capers. Add the parsley and stir to combine. Season
with salt and pepper, pour the sauce over the platter of veal birds, and
serve right away.




                                                  VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   209
THE CUT

Both the cutlets and the
                                Mango-Stuffed Veal Birdies with
veal cubes for the stufﬁng
in this dish come from the
                                Cognac–Green Peppercorn Sauce
veal leg, which may well be
the most useful section of              S E RVE S 6 TO 8

the animal. You can either
buy 21 ⁄ 2 pounds of the        We’re getting a little radical with veal here, letting it step out a bit from its
round (leg) and cut the
                                usual role. It’s unlikely that this preparation has been seen in either France or
appropriate amounts into
cutlets and cubes, or you       Italy, the main haunts of veal dishes. But the mellow tropical ﬂavor of mango
can buy 8 cutlets and 1         and the distinctive bite of green peppercorn really enliven this dish, and it all
pound of the round for
                                works great together. The Cognac–green peppercorn combination used to
cubes. It depends on
what’s available where you      be called a Madagascar sauce, and it is wonderful not only with this stuffed
are shopping. For details       veal dish but with any steak. Just be careful that you are not standing over the
on veal cutlets and how to
                                sauté pan when you add the Cognac, in case it ﬂames up.
get what you want when
buying them, see Panfried               This goes great with Rice Pilaf with Almonds and Currants (page 417)
Veal Cutlets in the German      and the green vegetable of your choice.
Style (page 206).
                                        FOR THE STUFFING

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                  1 large onion, peeled and quartered
As for many other veal                  1 clove garlic, peeled
recipes, cutlets and cubes
                                        1 pound top or bottom veal round, cut into 1-inch cubes
of pork tenderloin would
perform very well here.                 1 cup dried bread crumbs
                                        1 large egg, lightly beaten
                                        3 ounces dried mango, chopped (or substitute 14 small or 8 large dried
                                           apricots, chopped)
                                        1 tablespoon roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                        2 teaspoons roughly chopped fresh sage (or 1 teaspoon dried sage)
                                        2 teaspoons kosher salt
                                        1 teaspoon freshly cracked black pepper

                                        8 veal cutlets, about 11 ⁄ 2 pounds total
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        Flour for dredging
                                        3 tablespoons olive oil
                                        1 large shallot, minced
                                        1⁄ 2   cup Cognac, warmed
                                        1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                        2 tablespoons green peppercorns in brine, well rinsed
                                        2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, cut into pieces
                                        2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh parsley




210           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.                                               COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

                                                                                 If you have any of the
      2. Make the stufﬁng: In a food processor ﬁtted with a steel blade,         green peppercorn sauce
process the onion and garlic until ﬁne. Add the veal, bread crumbs, and          left over, it is fantastic on
egg and pulse repeatedly until the mixture is ﬁrm and smooth. Add the            steak of any kind. In fact,
                                                                                 it’s a very good idea to
mango, herbs, salt, and pepper and pulse a few times, until the mixture is
                                                                                 make a double quantity so
of an even consistency. Cover and refrigerate until ready to use.                you will have some left
                                                                                 over.
      3. Dry the veal cutlets with paper towels, then place them one by one
between two pieces of waxed paper and, using a meat pounder or other
blunt object like a small sauté pan, pound to about a 1⁄4-inch thickness.
Arrange the pounded veal slices on a work surface and sprinkle generously
with salt and pepper. Divide the stufﬁng among the veal slices, placing it in
the center of each. Roll the slices up, securing each with one or more
toothpicks. If you have time, cover and refrigerate the stuffed birdies for 20
minutes; this will help keep the birdies sealed during cooking.
      4. Dredge the veal birdies lightly with ﬂour, dusting off the excess. In
a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium heat until hot but not smok­
ing. Add the veal, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and cook until
browned on all sides, 3 to 4 minutes per side; transfer the birdies to a small
roasting pan as they are done. When all the birdies are browned, turn off
the oven and place the roasting pan in the oven while you prepare the
sauce.
       5. Increase the heat under the sauté pan to medium-high, add the
shallot, and cook, stirring, for 3 minutes. Add the Cognac, stock, and green
peppercorns (be very careful when adding the Cognac—watch for ﬂames!
If the Cognac catches ﬁre, take the pan off the heat and let the ﬂames burn
out on their own before you continue) and bring to a simmer, stirring to
dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan. Simmer until the
liquid is reduced by one third, about 10 minutes. Add the cold butter a lit­
tle at a time, stirring constantly to incorporate it into the sauce. Remove
from the heat, stir in the parsley, and season with salt and pepper.
      6. Arrange the veal birds on a platter, spoon the sauce over them, and
serve right away.




                                                  VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                      211
THE CUT

The best option here would
                                Veal Stir-fry on Big Fried Polenta
be tips from the veal ten­
derloin. As with beef, the
                                Croutons
thin end of this tapered
muscle is often too small               S E RVE S 4

to be used in roasts or
steaks and is therefore cut     Veal is most widely used in France and Italy, so it seems to have a particular
into tips. However, veal is
                                afﬁnity for the ﬂavors of those regions. But because it’s so tender, it is also
so tender that tips from any
part of the loin or even the    perfectly suited to stir-frying, the quick high-heat cooking technique of China
leg would be ﬁne. Ask your      and Southeast Asia. So here we bring the two together for a stir-fry with
butcher for guidance here.
                                Mediterranean ﬂavors.

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                  F O R T H E P O L E N TA
Cubes or strips of pork                 31 ⁄ 2 cups cold water
tenderloin or pork loin
                                        1 cup coarse yellow cornmeal
roast would work very well
                                        1⁄ 2   cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese
in this recipe.
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        2 tablespoons unsalted butter, at room temperature

                                        Kosher salt
                                        1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                        2 small onions, peeled and sliced 1 ⁄4 inch thick
                                        1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and cut into 2-inch squares
                                        1 yellow bell pepper, cored, seeded, and cut into 2-inch squares
                                        2 teaspoons minced garlic
                                        Freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        1 tablespoon roughly chopped fresh marjoram or oregano
                                        2 pounds veal tips
                                        1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                        1⁄ 2   cup dry red wine
                                        2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh basil
                                        2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
                                        Flour for dredging
                                        Vegetable oil for frying


                                       1. Make the polenta squares: In a medium saucepan, bring the water
                                to a boil over medium-high heat. Very slowly whisk in the cornmeal. Bring
                                the polenta back to a simmer, whisking to break up any lumps, and cook,
                                stirring every few minutes, until thick and creamy, about 30 minutes. The
                                polenta should be thick enough so a wooden spoon can stand up by itself
                                in the pot. Stir in the cheese, season with salt and pepper, and remove from
                                the heat.



212           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      2. Grease a rimmed baking sheet with the butter and pour in the
polenta, smoothing the surface with a metal spatula. Cool completely,
then cut the polenta into 4-inch squares. (The polenta can be made several
hours ahead or even the day before; cover and refrigerate.)
       3. In a large sauté pan, heat 2 tablespoons of the olive oil over
medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onions and cook,
stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the peppers and
cook, stirring frequently, until they are soft, about 7 minutes. Add the gar­
lic and cook, stirring, for 1 minute more. Season with salt and pepper and
stir in the marjoram. Transfer to a bowl.
      4. In the same pan, heat the remaining 2 tablespoons olive oil over
medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Dry the veal well with paper
towels and season it with salt and pepper. Add to the sauté pan and stir-fry,
moving the meat around very frequently so it cooks relatively evenly, until
well browned, 3 to 4 minutes. Add the veal to the bowl of onions and pep­
pers.
       5. Pour the stock and wine into the pan, stirring to dissolve the
brown crusty stuff in the bottom. Bring to a boil and cook until reduced by
half, 3 to 5 minutes. Add to the onions, peppers, and veal and toss well to
coat. Add the basil and lemon juice and adjust the seasoning with salt and
pepper, then cover to keep warm and set aside. (You can put the bowl in an
oven set on the lowest setting if you want.)
      6. Dredge the polenta squares lightly in ﬂour. In a large sauté pan,
heat 1⁄ 2 inch oil over medium-high heat until it is hot but not smoking. Add
the polenta squares in batches to the oil and fry them until they are a deep
golden brown on both sides, about 2 minutes. Drain on paper towels.
     7. To serve, place a polenta crouton on each plate and spoon the veal
and sauce over.




                                                 VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   213
THE CUT

See Sautéed Medallions of
                                 Grilled Veal, Sweet Potato, and
Veal (page 201) for details
on the veal leg, which is
                                 Red Onion Kebabs in the Piccata
called the round, and how
to choose cuts from this         Style
section of the animal. You
can buy a cut of round and               S E RVE S 4

cube it yourself, or you can
often ﬁnd veal cubes in the      Veal piccata, which is basically sautéed veal cutlets served with a lemon-gar­
supermarket or butcher
store.
                                 lic-parsley sauce, is a classic Italian dish. Here we update this traditional
                                 approach by cutting the veal into chunks, threading them onto skewers with
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           some red onions and sweet potatoes, and then basting with a lemon-garlic
Since these cubes are            vinaigrette as the meat grills. “But what about the parsley?” you may ask.
going onto the grill, any cut
                                 Well, to give the ﬁnished dish an added textural dimension, we roll the
from the veal round (leg)
can be used. But if you          kebabs in parsleyed bread crumbs when they’re done.
can’t ﬁnd veal in your store             You could serve this with a cold pasta salad or a spinach salad. We
when you go to buy the
                                 might even serve it on top of some pesto pasta.
ingredients for this dish,
you can also substitute                  FOR THE VINAIGRETTE
cubes of pork tenderloin.
                                         1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                         Minced zest of 1 lemon (yellow part only)
                                         2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
                                         1⁄ 3   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                         Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste

                                         1 cup fresh bread crumbs
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         1⁄ 2   teaspoon minced garlic
                                         3 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted
                                         Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste
                                         2 pounds boneless veal leg, cut into sixteen 1-inch cubes
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh sage
                                         2 large sweet potatoes, peeled, halved, boiled for 5 minutes, drained, and
                                             cut into 16 chunks
                                         2 large red onions, peeled and cut into 16 chunks


                                         1. Light a ﬁre in your grill. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

                                     2. Make the vinaigrette: In a small bowl, whisk together the garlic,
                                 lemon zest and juice, olive oil, and salt and pepper. Set aside.
                                       3. Toss the bread crumbs, parsley, garlic, melted butter, and salt and
                                 pepper together in a small bowl. Spread out on a small baking sheet, place
                                 in the oven, and toast, stirring frequently, until golden, about 7 minutes.


214            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      4. Dry the veal cubes with paper towels, sprinkle them generously
with salt and pepper, and rub them with the sage. Thread them onto skew­
ers alternately with the sweet potatoes and onions. Brush the kebabs with
the vinaigrette.
     5. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you
can hold your hands 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds),
place the kebabs on the grill and cook for 5 to 6 minutes per side for
medium-rare, basting two or three times with the vinaigrette. To check for
doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Cut into the center of one of the veal
cubes; it should be slightly less done than you like it.
      6. When the kebabs are done, brush them lightly with the vinai­
grette, roll them in the toasted crumbs, and serve.




                                               VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   215
THE CUT

It’s going to take some
                                 Grilled Veal Flank Steak on Texas
advance work to get hold
of this cut; call your
                                 Toast with Yellow Tomato Chutney
favorite butcher and see if
he can get it for you. As the    and Balsamic Raisins
name indicates, it comes
from the ﬂank of the ani­                S E RVE S 4 TO 6

mal, and, because we’re
talking a small animal here,     This is a unique cut, which you are only going to ﬁnd at the butcher’s. But it
the ﬂank steak itself is also
small.
                                 does exist, and if you can get your hands on it and grill it up, people will go
                                 nuts over it. It has a pleasingly soft, tender texture because it’s veal, but it
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           comes from a well-exercised part of the animal, so it’s also got some real ﬂa­
All of these ﬂavors also go      vor on it. That means we can pair it with garlicky Texas toast and a mild all-
very well with beef ﬂank
                                 purpose yellow tomato chutney, then add some vinegar-soaked raisins for an
steak, which is of course a
lot easier to ﬁnd. And,          extra burst of ﬂavor. (If you happen to forget to soak the raisins, though, they
again, pork tenderloin           are not essential. We know this because it’s happened to us once or twice.)
works very well in this
                                         Serve this with a Spicy Yellow Squash Hobo Pack (page 441) and
recipe too.
                                 some simple grilled peaches for a very luxe outdoor dinner.

                                         FOR THE CHUTNEY

                                         2 tablespoons olive oil
                                         1 red onion, peeled and diced small
                                         2 large or 3 small yellow tomatoes, cored and diced small
                                         1⁄ 2   cup tomato juice
                                         3 ⁄4   cup cider vinegar
                                         1⁄ 3   cup packed brown sugar
                                         Pinch of ground allspice
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                         F OR TH E TOAST

                                         5 tablespoons olive oil
                                         2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                         Four to six 1-inch-thick slices Italian bread (1 per serving)


                                         2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                         Two 11 ⁄ 2-pound veal ﬂank steaks, about 1 inch thick
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         1⁄ 2   cup dark raisins, soaked in 1 ⁄4 cup balsamic vinegar for 4 hours




216            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

      2. Make the chutney: In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-
high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onions and cook, stirring
occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the tomatoes, tomato
juice, vinegar, brown sugar, and allspice and bring to a simmer, then
reduce the heat to low and simmer until the mixture begins to thicken
nicely, 30 to 45 minutes. Season with salt and pepper and set aside.
      3. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

      4. In a small bowl, combine the oil and 2 tablespoons of the minced
garlic and mix well. Coat the bread lightly with this mixture, place on a
baking sheet, and toast in the oven until hard and crispy, 5 to 10 minutes.
Set aside.
      5. In a small bowl, combine the remaining 2 tablespoons garlic with
the parsley and olive oil and mix well. Dry the steaks with paper towels,
coat them thoroughly with this mixture, and sprinkle generously with salt
and pepper.
      6. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you
can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds),
place the steaks on the grill and cook until well seared on one side, 3 to 4
minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the desired doneness, 4 to 5 min­
utes more for medium-rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat:
Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less
done than you like it. When the meat is done to your liking, remove it
from the grill, cover loosely with foil, and allow to rest for about 5 min­
utes.
      7. Thinly slice the steaks across the grain. Top the garlic toasts with
the veal, sprinkle with the balsamic-soaked raisins, and serve, passing the
chutney on the side.




                                                   VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   217
                               RECIPES FOR
                               SMALL TOUGH CUTS OF VEAL

10 STEPS TO GREAT VEAL         Stewed Veal Riblets with Beer, Bacon, and Beans
STEWS

 1. Dry the meat cubes.        Pepper-Crusted Veal Riblets Braised with Red Onions over
                               Mushroom Risotto
 2. Season the meat
    cubes generously.
                               Southeast Asian–Style Veal Cakes with Aromatic Herbs and
 3. Brown the meat cubes,      Two Dipping Sauces
    in batches if necessary.
                               A Hot Open-Faced Veal Meat Loaf Sandwich with Arugula
 4. Remove the meat from
    the pot, adjust the        and Blue Cheese–Tomato Relish
    amount of fat in the
    pot, and sauté the         White Veal Stew with Mushrooms, Corn, and Sherry
    aromatics and
    vegetables.                Simple Brown Veal Stew with Tomatoes, Peppers, and Capers

 5. Deglaze the pot with
                               Spring Veal and Vegetable Stew with Bacon and Chervil
    some of the liquid.

 6. Return the meat to the     Veal, Sausage, and Fava Bean Stew with Lemony Greens
    pot along with enough
    liquid to cover.

 7. Bring to a simmer and
    skim off any ﬁlm, then
    reduce the heat to low
    and simmer gently.

 8. Check for doneness
    early and often.

 9. Skim the ﬁlm and fat
    from the liquid.

10. Add any ﬁnal
    seasonings, season to
    taste with salt and
    pepper again, and
    serve.




218
Stewed Veal Riblets with Beer,                                                     THE CUT

                                                                                   Unlike beef short ribs,

Bacon, and Beans                                                                   which can come from three
                                                                                   separate sections of the
                                                                                   animal, veal riblets come
     S E RVE S 4                                                                   only from the breast. These
                                                                                   guys are small, but they are
If you liked beans and bacon when you were a kid, you are going to go out of       very ﬂavorful and, after
                                                                                   long cooking, incredibly
your mind over this dish. It is basically a high-tone version of that classic
                                                                                   tender. You will probably
down-home dish, with veal ribs adding a particularly ﬂavorsome component.          have to go to a butcher
You can use either boneless or bone-in riblets here; the bone-in tend to add       shop to get them.

a bit more ﬂavor, but the boneless ones make for easier eating.
                                                                                   OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
     To make this quicker, you can use good-quality canned beans but add
                                                                                   You can substitute veal
them at the end.                                                                   stew meat for the riblets, or
     All you need to add for a fantastic meal is a salad of arugula or romaine.    you can use 1-inch cubes
                                                                                   of beef chuck stew meat.
     2 tablespoons olive oil
     3 pounds veal riblets
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     4 slices bacon, diced large
     1 onion, peeled and diced small
     Two 12-ounce bottles beer of your choice
     2 plum tomatoes, cored and diced small
     1 ⁄4   cup grainy mustard
     1 ⁄4   cup catsup
     1 ⁄4   cup molasses
     1⁄ 2   cup balsamic vinegar
     1 pound (about 2 cups) dried white beans, picked over, rinsed, soaked in
        water to cover for 2 hours, and drained (or substitute two 151 ⁄ 2-ounce
        cans white beans, rinsed and drained)
     1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley


      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Dry
the veal riblets with paper towels and sprinkle them generously with salt
and pepper. Add them to the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to
avoid crowding, and brown well on all sides, 10 to 12 minutes total; trans­
fer the pieces to a platter as they are done.
     2. When all the veal is browned, pour the fat out of the pot, then add
the bacon to the pot and cook until it is crisp, 6 to 8 minutes. Transfer the
bacon to the platter of ribs.




                                                    VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                    219
                                      3. Pour off all but about 2 tablespoons of fat from the pot, add the
                                onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 min­
                                utes. Add the beer and bring to a simmer, stirring to dissolve the brown
                                crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan. Add the tomatoes, mustard, catsup,
                                molasses, vinegar, beans, and the bacon, stirring well to combine. Bring
                                just to a boil, then reduce the heat to low, cover, and simmer gently for 1
                                hour if using soaked white beans, 10 minutes if using canned beans.
                                     4. Return the ribs and bacon to the pot and continue cooking until
                                both beans and meat are tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours more. Season with salt and
                                pepper, garnish with the parsley, and serve.




THE CUT

See Stewed Veal Riblets
                                Pepper-Crusted Veal Riblets
(page 219) for more infor­
mation about veal riblets.
                                Braised with Red Onions over
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                Mushroom Risotto
It’s ﬁne to substitute veal
                                        S E RVE S 4
stew meat for the riblets in
this recipe, or you can sub­
stitute 1-inch cubes of beef    Deeply ﬂavored braised meats seem to match up perfectly with risotto. In this
chuck or lamb leg.              simple recipe, we braise veal riblets in red wine and stock along with a lot of
                                red onions, then serve them on top of a risotto ﬂavored with white mush­
                                rooms. You can substitute any kind of wild or exotic mushrooms if you want,
                                but the standard supermarket “button” mushrooms actually have more meaty
                                ﬂavor than they get credit for.

                                        3 tablespoons vegetable oil, or more if needed
                                        2 pounds veal riblets
                                        Kosher salt to taste
                                        1⁄ 3   cup freshly cracked black pepper, plus more to taste
                                        4 red onions, peeled and diced small
                                        1 cup dry red wine
                                        2 cups veal stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)

                                        FOR TH E R I SOTTO

                                        4 to 6 cups veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                        3 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                        1 small onion, peeled and diced small




220           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1 pound white mushrooms, trimmed and thinly sliced
     11 ⁄ 2 cups arborio rice
     1 ⁄4   cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other heavy pot with a lid, heat the
oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Dry the veal
riblets with paper towels and sprinkle them generously with salt and with
the pepper. Add them to the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to
avoid crowding, and brown well on all sides, 10 to 12 minutes total; trans­
fer the pieces to a platter as they are done.
     2. When all the riblets are browned, pour off the oil or add more to
the pot as needed so that you have about 3 tablespoons of oil. Add the
onions and cook, stirring occasionally, until light brown, 11 to 13 minutes.
Pour in the wine and cook for 2 more minutes, stirring to dissolve the
brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan.
      3. Return the veal to the pot, add the stock, and season with salt and
pepper. Bring to a boil and skim any ﬁlm from the surface, then reduce the
heat, cover, and simmer gently until the riblets are tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours.
      4. When the riblets have been cooking for 1 hour, start the risotto: In
a medium saucepan, bring the stock to a boil, then reduce the heat to low
and keep at a simmer. In a large sauté pan, melt the butter over medium
heat. Add the onion and mushrooms and cook, stirring occasionally, until
the onion is translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the rice, stirring to coat with
the butter, and cook until the rice just begins to color, 3 to 4 minutes.
Add the simmering stock 1⁄ 2 cup at a time, stirring constantly until all the
liquid is absorbed each time before adding more. It should take 25 to 30
minutes to add all of the liquid. Remove the pan from the heat, stir in the
Parmesan cheese and parsley, and season with salt and pepper.
     5. Serve the risotto with the riblets arranged on top.




                                                  VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   221
THE CUT

Ground veal, which may
                                 Southeast Asian–Style Veal Cakes
come from trimmings from
just about any part of the
                                 with Aromatic Herbs and Two
animal but the shank, is
perhaps the second most          Dipping Sauces
readily available type of
veal, coming in right after              S E RVE S 8 AS AN APPETI Z E R

cutlets. You can often ﬁnd
it in the supermarkets; if       This is a kind of Southeast Asian veal burger. Cooks in that part of the world,
you don’t see it, ask the
butcher if he has any trim­
                                 especially in Vietnam, where beef and veal are most readily available, tend to
mings or the odd piece of        treat this subtly ﬂavored meat as they do ﬁsh: They use plenty of spices with
veal shoulder that he can        it. Rather than covering up the ﬂavor, the aromatic spices actually tend to
grind up for you.
                                 complement it.

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                         After the burgers are browned, you pile on whole fresh herbs, wrap
Ground pork is also very         them up in lettuce leaves, and dip them into the slightly spicy sauces. They
good in this dish; you just      are very light, very aromatic, and very delicious.
might want to cook it a
                                         These make a wonderful appetizer served in front of any Asian-style
little longer.
                                 entrée.

                                         F OR D I PPI N G SAU CE #1
                                         1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
                                         1 ⁄4   cup ﬁsh sauce (nam pla)
                                         3 tablespoons sugar

                                         F OR D I PPI N G SAU CE #2
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roasted unsalted peanuts, ﬁnely chopped
                                         2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                         2 tablespoons sesame oil
                                         1 ⁄4   cup soy sauce
                                         2 tablespoons white vinegar
                                         1 ⁄4   cup ﬁnely chopped scallions (white and green parts)

                                         2 pounds ground veal
                                         3 tablespoon minced fresh ginger
                                         1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                         1 tablespoon minced fresh chile peppers of your choice
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
                                         Kosher salt and freshly ground white pepper to taste
                                         1 ⁄4   cup cracked coriander seeds (or 2 tablespoons ground coriander)
                                         3 tablespoons vegetable oil
                                         16 large lettuce leaves
                                         1⁄ 2   cup fresh mint leaves




222            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1⁄ 2   cup fresh basil leaves
     1⁄ 2   cup sprigs fresh cilantro


      1. Make the dipping sauces: In a small bowl, combine the lime juice,
ﬁsh sauce, and sugar and stir well to combine and dissolve the sugar; set
aside. In another small bowl, combine the peanuts, ginger, sesame oil, soy
sauce, vinegar, and scallions. Mix well to combine and set aside.
     2. Make the veal cakes: In a large bowl, combine the ground veal,
ginger, garlic, chiles, cilantro, and salt and white pepper and mix until it
forms a uniform consistency. Form into 16 small meatballs. Sprinkle them
generously with salt and white pepper, roll in the coriander, and ﬂatten
each one to make a 1-inch-thick patty.
      3. In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-high heat until hot
but not smoking. Add the veal cakes in a single layer, in batches to avoid
crowding, and cook until lightly browned, about 3 minutes on each side;
transfer them to paper towels to drain as they are done. To check for done-
ness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in a veal cake; it should be
slightly less done than you like it.
      4. To serve, arrange the veal cakes on a serving platter. Arrange the
lettuce, mint, basil, and cilantro and the dipping sauces on another large
platter. Pass the veal cakes so that guests can “wrap their own” in lettuce
leaves, garnishing with the fresh herbs and dipping sauces.




                                                 VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   223
THE CUT

See Southeast Asian–Style
                                A Hot Open-Faced Veal Meat Loaf
Veal Cakes (page 222) for
more information on
                                Sandwich with Arugula and Blue
ground veal.
                                Cheese–Tomato Relish
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                        MAKE S 6 SAN DWICH E S
Ground lamb, pork, or even
beef also works just ﬁne in
this recipe; we like a com­     We think it’s worth cooking meat loaf just to be able to have sandwiches
bination of lamb and pork.      made from it. This version is pretty straightforward and, because it is made
                                from veal, it’s lighter than many others. The tomato relish is simple but full of
                                ﬂavor, and when you put it all together on some thick, crusty bread with a lit­
                                tle arugula, you’ve got a great hot sandwich.
                                        Serve this with some deviled eggs on the side and you’ll have a lunch
                                to dream about.

                                        F O R T H E M E AT L O A F

                                        2 tablespoons olive oil
                                        1 red onion, peeled and diced small
                                        2 stalks celery, diced small
                                        1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                        2 tablespoons tomato puree (or substitute catsup)
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh basil
                                        2 large eggs
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        2 pounds ground veal

                                        FOR THE RELISH

                                        2 tomatoes (about the size of baseballs), cored and diced small
                                        1⁄ 2   cup crumbled blue cheese of your choice
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                        2 tablespoons balsamic or red wine vinegar


                                        1⁄ 3   cup olive oil
                                        2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 lemon)
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        2 bunches arugula, trimmed, washed, and dried
                                        6 thick slices of your favorite bread


                                        1. Preheat the oven to 300°F. Lightly oil a small roasting pan.

                                       2. Make the meat loaf: In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-
                                high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and celery and cook,
                                stirring occasionally, until the onion is translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the


224           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
garlic and cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Add the tomato puree and continue         COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

to cook, stirring frequently, for 2 minutes more. Remove from the heat and         Meat loaf is one of those
allow to cool almost to room temperature (in the refrigerator if you’re in         dishes that is just as good
                                                                                   cold as hot. If you’ve got
a hurry).
                                                                                   any of this left over, just
      3. In a large bowl, combine the eggs, salt and pepper, and veal. Add         make cold sandwiches. If
                                                                                   you run out of the tomato
the cooled onion mixture and mix well. Shape into a loaf about the size of         relish, this is also great
a loaf of bread, place in the oiled roasting pan, and bake for 45 minutes to       with—what else?—catsup.
1 hour, until the juice that comes out when you stick a fork into the center
of the loaf is clear rather than red or pink. Remove from the oven, cover
loosely with foil, and allow to rest for 10 to 20 minutes before slicing.
     4. While the meat loaf is baking, make the relish and the salad: In a
small bowl, combine the tomatoes, blue cheese, parsley, and vinegar and
mix well. In a large bowl, combine the olive oil, lemon juice, and salt and
pepper and whisk to combine. Add the arugula and toss well to coat.
      5. When the meat loaf has rested, toast the bread and cut the meat
loaf into thick slices. Place a piece of toast on each plate, top it with a por­
tion of the salad and a slice of loaf, then spoon some of the relish on top
and serve.



                                                                                   THE CUT

                                                                                   You should not have much

White Veal Stew with Mushrooms,                                                    of a problem ﬁnding stew
                                                                                   meat in any supermarket

Corn, and Sherry                                                                   that sells veal. Stew meat
                                                                                   can come from many cuts
                                                                                   of veal, basically any place
      S E RVE S 4 TO 6                                                             where the butcher trims a
                                                                                   larger piece of meat and
There is a very famous French dish called blanquette de veau, a light-colored      has some decent-sized
                                                                                   chunks of trim left over.
stew of veal, mushrooms, and baby onions in a sauce of cream and white             Because veal is so tender,
wine. Its name comes from the word blanc, French for “white.” It’s too rich a      it is not as crucial as with
dish for our palates, but we still like the idea of taking advantage of veal’s     other meats to know which
                                                                                   cut is the source of your
lightness—both in color and ﬂavor—to make a stew that is not as heavy as           stew meat. If might be difﬁ­
most of the genre. So here we brown the veal lightly, just until it is golden      cult, though, ﬁnding cubes
brown, then combine it with the traditional onions and mushrooms, add some         as large as we call for here.
                                                                                   In that case, you can, of
fresh corn for an American touch, and use sherry instead of white wine.            course, use smaller cubes
Because it is a fortiﬁed wine, it gives the stew plenty of richness without all    and brown them for a
that cream.                                                                        shorter time, or you can get
                                                                                   hold of a piece of boneless
      This light stew is great on a cool fall day, with a French baguette and a    veal, preferably from the
“chopped salad” of cucumbers, tomatoes, green beans, and blue cheese               shoulder or round, and
with just a bit of leaf lettuce.                                                   cube it up yourself.



                                                   VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                     225
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                  2 tablespoons unsalted butter
Cubes of pork tenderloin                2 tablespoons vegetable oil, or more if needed
also match up well with the
                                        2 pounds veal stew meat, trimmed and cut into 11 ⁄2-inch cubes
ﬂavors in this dish.
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked white pepper to taste
                                        Flour for dredging
                                        2 onions, peeled and diced small
                                        1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                        1 pound white mushrooms, trimmed and quartered
                                        1 cup dry sherry
                                        1 cup fresh corn kernels (1 to 2 ears)
                                        2 cups veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                        3 tablespoons fresh thyme leaves


                                      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
                                heat 1 tablespoon each of the butter and oil over medium heat until the
                                butter has just melted. Dry the veal with paper towels, sprinkle it gener­
                                ously with salt and white pepper, and dredge it lightly in the ﬂour, shaking
                                off any excess. Add half of the veal to the pot, in a single layer, and brown
                                lightly on all sides, 8 to 10 minutes; transfer the pieces to a platter as they
                                are done. Add the remaining 1 tablespoon each butter and oil to the pot
                                and, as soon as the butter has melted, add the remaining veal and brown in
                                the same manner, transferring the pieces to the platter as they are done.
                                       2. Pour off the fat or add more oil to the pot as needed so you have
                                about 2 tablespoons of fat in the pot. Add the onions and cook, stirring
                                occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic and cook,
                                stirring, for 1 minute. Add the mushrooms and cook, stirring frequently,
                                for 5 minutes. Pour in the sherry and continue to cook for 2 more minutes,
                                stirring to dissolve any brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pot.
                                      3. Return the veal to the pot, add the corn and stock, and season with
                                salt and white pepper. Bring to a boil, reduce the heat to low, cover, and
                                simmer gently until the veal is fork-tender, 1 to 11⁄ 2 hours. To check for
                                doneness, take a piece of meat out of the stew, cut into it to check for
                                color, and taste it for tenderness.
                                    4. When the stew is done, remove it from the heat, stir in the fresh
                                thyme, and serve.




226           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Simple Brown Veal Stew with                                                         THE CUT

                                                                                    See White Veal Stew

Tomatoes, Peppers, and Capers                                                       (page 225) for information
                                                                                    on veal stew meat.

      S E RVE S 6



This classic veal stew has some kinship with the famous Hungarian goulash,
which is really just a meat-and-vegetable stew ﬂavored with paprika. Some­
how we think of bell peppers as being an important part of that dish, though,
so this reminds us of it. To ﬁnish off the stew, we top it with some crisp-fried
capers, which add a fresh salty-tart taste to the ﬁnal dish.
      Be sure that you don’t overbrown the veal cubes, which would make
them a little tough; you are just looking for a golden brown on the outside of
the meat here.

      1 ⁄4   cup olive oil, or more if needed
      2 pounds veal stew meat, trimmed and cut into 1-inch cubes
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      All-purpose ﬂour for dredging
      2 onions, peeled and diced medium
      1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced medium
      1 green bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced medium
      2 tablespoons minced garlic
      1 cup dry white wine
      3 plum tomatoes, cored and diced small
      1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      3 tablespoons unsalted butter
      1⁄ 2   cup small capers, rinsed
      1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley


      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
heat 2 tablespoons of the oil over medium-high heat until hot but not
smoking. Dry the veal with paper towels, sprinkle it generously with salt
and pepper, and dredge it lightly in the ﬂour, shaking off any excess. Add
half the veal to the pot, in a single layer, and brown lightly on all sides, 8 to
10 minutes total; transfer the pieces to a platter as they are done. Add the
remaining 2 tablespoons oil to the pot and brown the second half of the
veal in the same manner, transferring the pieces to the platter as they are
done.
     2. Add oil to the pot or pour off the fat as needed so that you end up
with about 2 tablespoons fat in the pot. Add the onions and cook, stirring



                                                   VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                     227
                                occasionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the bell peppers
                                and garlic and cook, stirring, for 2 minutes more. Pour in the wine and
                                cook for 2 minutes, stirring to dissolve any brown crusty stuff on the bot­
                                tom of the pot.
                                      3. Return the veal to the pot, add the tomatoes and stock, and season
                                with salt and pepper. Bring to a boil and skim any ﬁlm off the surface.
                                Then reduce the heat to low, cover, and simmer gently until the veal is
                                very tender, 1 to 11⁄ 2 hours. To check for doneness, take a piece of meat out
                                of the stew, cut into it to check for color, and taste it for tenderness.
                                     4. When the stew is almost done, cook the capers: In a medium sauté
                                pan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the capers and cook, stirring
                                occasionally, until crisp, 4 to 5 minutes.
                                      5. Place a generous helping of the stew in each bowl and sprinkle
                                with the parsley. Top with the capers, drizzle with any leftover butter from
                                the caper pan, and serve.




THE CUT

See White Veal Stew
                                Spring Veal and Vegetable Stew
(page 225) for information
on veal stew meat.
                                with Bacon and Chervil
                                        S E RVE S 6



                                This stew features some of the same root vegetables that you see in heartier
                                dishes—carrots, onions, and turnips—but because veal has such light ﬂavor
                                for a red meat, the result is lighter than you might think. For a fresh spring ﬂa­
                                vor, we add some peas, then ﬁnish up the dish by sprinkling a crunchy, ﬂa­
                                vorful combination of bread crumbs, crumbled bacon, and chervil over the
                                top for some ﬂavor contrast. Chervil is a very nice, mild spring herb; since it is
                                in the parsley family, though, you can always substitute parsley.

                                        6 slices bacon, diced small
                                        2 pounds veal stew meat, trimmed and cut into 1-inch cubes




228           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     All-purpose ﬂour for dredging
     12 small pearl onions, peeled
     2 carrots, peeled and diced small
     1 small turnip, peeled and diced small (about 1 cup)
     1 cup dry white wine
     1 cup veal or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
     1 cup fresh peas, blanched in boiling water for 30 seconds and drained
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh chervil (or substitute parsley)
     1 ⁄4   cup fresh bread crumbs, toasted


      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other heavy pot with a lid, cook
the bacon over medium-high heat until crisp, 6 to 8 minutes. Remove and
drain on paper towels.
       2. Pour off all but about 2 tablespoons of fat from the pot. Dry the
veal with paper towels, sprinkle it generously with salt and pepper, and
dredge it lightly in the ﬂour, shaking off any excess. Add the veal to the pot
in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and brown well
on all sides, about 10 minutes total; transfer the pieces to a platter as they
are done.
        3. Add the onions, carrots, and turnip to the pot and cook, stirring
occasionally, just until the onions begin to turn translucent, 4 to 5 minutes.
Return the veal to the pot, add the white wine and stock, and season with
salt and pepper. Bring to a boil and skim any scum off the surface, then
cover, reduce the heat to low, and simmer gently until the veal is tender, 1
to 11⁄ 2 hours. To check for doneness, take a piece of meat out of the stew,
cut into it to check for color, and taste it for tenderness. When the veal is
done, add the peas and taste to adjust the seasoning.
      4. While the stew is cooking, crumble the bacon and place it in a
small bowl with the chervil and bread crumbs. Mix well to combine.
     5. Place a generous serving of stew in each bowl, sprinkle with the
bacon mixture, and serve hot.




                                                       VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   229
THE CUT

See White Veal Stew
                                Veal, Sausage, and Fava Bean
(page 225) for details
about veal stew meat.
                                Stew with Lemony Greens
                                        S E RVE S 6
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Cubes of beef chuck or
lamb leg are also good in       Veal works very well in stews, which is fortunate, because stew meat is one
this dish.                      of the few cuts of this meat that is very readily available. In this recipe, we
                                combine the veal with fava beans, one of the world’s most ﬂavorful beans,
                                and a staple of Mediterranean cooking. We love favas, maybe because we
                                were introduced to them in Tunis, where you can stop on the street and buy
                                little cones of roasted fava beans the way you buy peanuts in New York or
                                chestnuts in Hong Kong. Fresh favas are unbeatable, but they are hard to
                                locate and difﬁcult to prepare, so here we used the dried version. If you can’t
                                ﬁnd them, you can always substitute lima beans. (You can also use canned
                                beans, but add them just 15 minutes before the stew is done.) With a little
                                sausage for some underlying oomph and lemony greens to add a little tart
                                and a little bitter, this is a stew with a lot of great ﬂavors going on.
                                        All you’ll need to make a meal of this is a loaf of good bread, but Minted
                                Fresh Peas (page 428) make a nice light accompaniment.

                                        1 pound dried fava beans (or substitute dried lima beans)
                                        2 tablespoons vegetable oil, or more if needed
                                        1 pound veal stew meat, trimmed and cut into 1-inch cubes
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        1 pound Italian hot or sweet sausage links, cut into 1-inch cubes
                                        2 large onions, peeled and diced small
                                        2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                        1 cup canned whole tomatoes, diced small (with their juice)
                                        2 cups dry white wine

                                        FOR THE GREENS

                                        3 tablespoons olive oil
                                        2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                        1 pound spinach (or substitute other dark leafy greens such as Swiss
                                           chard, beet greens, or young kale), trimmed, well washed, and dried
                                        1 lemon, halved
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                        1. If   using dried beans, soak them overnight in cold water; drain.
                                     2. Place the soaked beans in a saucepan, cover with 2 inches of water,
                                and simmer, partially covered, over medium heat for 15 minutes. Drain,


230           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
reserving 1 cup of the cooking liquid, then slip outer skins off the beans
and set the beans aside. (If using frozen beans, thaw according to the pack­
age directions.)
      3. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Dry
the veal with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with salt and pepper.
Add the veal to the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid
crowding, and brown lightly on all sides, 8 to 10 minutes total; transfer to
a platter as they are done. In the same pot, cook the sausages, in batches if
necessary, until well browned, about 10 minutes.
       4. Pour off all but 2 tablespoons of the fat. Add the onions and cook,
stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic and
cook, stirring, for 1 minute more.
      5. Return the veal and sausage to the pot and add the drained beans,
the reserved liquid (or 1 cup water or veal or chicken stock if using frozen
beans), the tomatoes, and white wine. Bring to a boil and skim any ﬁlm off
the surface, then reduce the heat to low, cover, and simmer gently until the
meat and beans are tender, 1 to 11⁄ 2 hours. To check for doneness, take a
piece of meat out of the stew, cut into it to check for color, and taste it for
tenderness.
      6. When the stew is almost done, make the greens: In the largest
sauté pan you have, heat the oil over medium-high heat until hot but not
smoking. Add the garlic and cook, stirring, for just 10 seconds. Add the
spinach and cook, stirring vigorously, until wilted, about 1 minute more.
Remove the pan from the heat, squeeze both lemon halves over the
spinach, and toss to coat. Season with salt and pepper.
     7. Spoon a generous serving of stew into each bowl, top with the
sautéed greens, and serve hot.




                                                  VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   231
      RECIPES FOR
      ODD CUTS OF VEAL: OFFAL ET AL.

      Scrambled Eggs on Toast with Calf ’s Brains and Truffle Oil

      Calf ’s Brains Meunière

      Grilled Sweetbreads over Wilted Spinach with Sweet-and-Sour
      Bacon Dressing

      Seared Calf ’s Liver with Bacon, Onions, and Sweet-and-Sour
      Madeira Sauce

      Seared Veal Kidneys with Roasted Pears and Horseradish-
      Mustard Sauce




232
Scrambled Eggs on Toast with                                                        THE CUT

                                                                                    Like other parts of the ani­

Calf ’s Brains and Truff le Oil                                                     mal that we Americans
                                                                                    tend to ﬁnd offputting,
                                                                                    brains are a delicacy in
      S E RVE S 4                                                                   many parts of the world.
                                                                                    They have a wonderful
OK, so this is not a dish for everybody. But if you can get past your squea­        creamy texture and a very
                                                                                    rich, delicate ﬂavor. And
mishness (and if you can ﬁnd a butcher who still sells them), calf’s brains are
                                                                                    besides, cooking with them
really a great dish. You do have to put a fair amount of work into it, though,      is a kind of a testament to
because brains are very perishable and need to be subjected to multiple rins­       the historical importance of
                                                                                    making use of every part of
ings, then simmered, then pressed down to ﬁrm them up, then sautéed. But if
                                                                                    the animal. So you not only
you have adventurous friends who are looking for some food that they have           get some delicious food,
not had before, this luxe version of the ultimate comfort food, scrambled eggs      you can feel virtuous about
                                                                                    it at the same time.
on toast, might just ﬁt the bill.
      In fact, I (Chris) would like to dedicate this dish to Saul Garlic, a close
personal friend who also happens to be a trusted business adviser. Over the
years Saul’s guidance through the treacherous waters of the restaurant busi­
ness has proven indispensable. So acute is his acumen that to a small group
of colleagues he is known as “the Brain.” Nearly as impressive as his busi­
ness skills is his ability to recall the smallest details of meals that he con­
sumed twenty years ago. His appetite and his appreciation of food has
always been inspiring. So, Brain, this is for you, because I know that if you
were ever to actually eat brains you would deﬁnitely want them fried.

      1⁄ 2   pound calf’s brains
      1 ⁄4   cup white vinegar
      2 teaspoons kosher salt, plus more to taste
      White pepper to taste
      All-purpose ﬂour for dredging
      5 tablespoons unsalted butter
      2 tablespoons vegetable oil
      1⁄ 2   cup minced shallots
      2 tablespoons light cream
      8 large eggs, lightly beaten
      2 tablespoons chopped fresh chives
      6 slices toast, buttered
      White trufﬂe oil to taste


      1. Place the brains in a stainless steel or enamel saucepan, add
enough water to cover, and allow to sit for 5 minutes, then drain; repeat
this process three times. Remove the membranes and trim the white bits



                                                    VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                    233
                                from the brains. Place the brains in the saucepan again, add water to cover
                                and 2 tablespoons of the vinegar, and allow to sit for 2 hours.
                                      2. Drain the brains once again, then return to the saucepan. Pour
                                enough boiling water into the pan to just cover the brains, add the salt and
                                the remaining 2 tablespoons of vinegar, and bring just to a simmer over
                                medium-high heat. Reduce the heat to low and simmer gently for 20 min­
                                utes. Remove the pan from the heat and let the brains cool in the pan.
                                      3. When the brains are cool, remove them from the liquid and place
                                them on a parchment-lined baking sheet. Cover them with another sheet
                                of parchment, then cover with another baking sheet. Weight down the top
                                baking sheet with a phone book or some heavy cans and refrigerate the
                                brains for 1 hour. (Pressing the brains will ﬁrm them up so they will slice
                                and sauté more easily.)
                                      4. Cut the brains into 1 ⁄ 2-inch slices and dry them with paper towels.
                                Sprinkle them generously with salt and pepper and dredge them lightly in
                                the ﬂour. In a large sauté pan, melt 3 tablespoons of the butter with the oil
                                over medium-high heat. Add the brains and brown lightly, about 3 minutes
                                per side. Transfer to a platter.
                                       5. In another large sauté pan, melt the remaining butter over medium-
                                high heat. Add the shallots and sauté until very soft, about 3 minutes. Whisk
                                the cream into the eggs, add the eggs to the pan, and scramble them gen­
                                tly, stirring frequently, until they are just set. Season them with salt and
                                white pepper and add the chives. Fold the hot brains into the eggs, spoon
                                over the hot buttered toast, drizzle with trufﬂe oil, and serve immediately.




THE CUT

See Scrambled Eggs on
                                Calf ’s Brains Meunière
Toast with Calf’s Brains
                                        S E RVE S 6 AS AN APPETI Z E R
(page 233) for more infor­
mation on brains.
                                This dish, which is a variation on the traditional French meunière approach to
                                brains, is a tribute to our friend James Burke. Many people think that Jimmy is
                                known as “a brain” because of his uncanny ability to serve fantastic Italian
                                food at his Waltham, Massachusetts, restaurant, Tuscan Grill, while simulta­
                                neously vacationing in Florida. But we know that it’s because he loves to
                                cook and serve brains.
                                        Try this as an appetizer when you plan to serve a straightforward grilled
                                or roasted entrée.


234           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     11 ⁄ 2 pounds calf’s brains
     1 ⁄4   cup white vinegar
     2 teaspoons kosher salt, plus more to taste
     Freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     All-purpose ﬂour for dredging
     2 tablespoons unsalted butter
     2 tablespoons vegetable oil
     3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh parsley

     F OR TH E SAU CE

     3 tablespoons unsalted butter, cut into pieces
     1 lemon, halved
     2 tablespoons capers, rinsed and drained


      1. Place the brains in a stainless steel or enamel saucepan, add
enough water to cover, and allow to sit for 5 minutes, then drain; repeat
this process three times. Remove the membranes and trim the white bits
from the brains. Place the brains in the saucepan again, add water to cover
and 2 tablespoons of the vinegar, and allow to sit for 2 hours.
      2. Drain the brains once again, then return to the saucepan. Pour
enough boiling water into the pan to just cover the brains, add the salt and
the remaining 2 tablespoons vinegar, and bring just to a simmer over
medium-high heat. Reduce the heat to low and simmer gently for 20 min­
utes. Remove the pan from the heat and let the brains cool in the pan.
      3. When the brains are cool, remove them from the liquid and place
them on a parchment-lined baking sheet. Cover them with another sheet
of parchment, then cover with another baking sheet. Weight down the top
baking sheet with a phone book or some heavy cans and refrigerate the
brains for 1 hour. (Pressing the brains will ﬁrm them up so they will slice
and sauté more easily.)
     4. Cut the brains into 1 ⁄ 2-inch slices and dry them with paper towels.
Sprinkle them generously with salt and pepper and dredge them lightly in
the ﬂour. In a large sauté pan, melt the butter with the oil over medium-
high heat. Add the brains and brown lightly, about 3 minutes per side.
Transfer to a platter and sprinkle with the parsley.
      5. Make the sauce: Add the butter to the sauté pan, swirling the pan
so that the butter melts evenly. When the butter has reached a nutty
golden brown color, immediately squeeze the lemon juice into the pan
and add the capers. Pour the browned butter sauce over the brains and
serve immediately.



                                                      VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?   235
THE CUT

Veal sweetbreads are usu­
                                Grilled Sweetbreads over Wilted
ally the thymus gland of
the calf, although they may
                                Spinach with Sweet-and-Sour
also be the pancreas. It
might be hard to ﬁnd fresh      Bacon Dressing
sweetbreads, but they are
worth looking for, so try               S E RVE S 4 TO 6 AS AN APPETI Z E R

your local high-quality
butcher. As with all organ      This is the famous “green eggs and ham” dish. Sweetbreads are great, and if
meats, be sure they are
very fresh.
                                you introduce people to them cooked this way, most of them will think you’re
                                a culinary genius because you’ve given them an appreciation for something
                                they thought they would hate.
                                        Classically, sweetbreads are poached whole, then sliced and sautéed.
                                But we prefer to poach them only brieﬂy, then separate the “nuggets” and
                                grill them. This not only minimizes their sometimes mealy consistency, it also
                                provides a crispy crust to contrast with the creamy, tender interior.
                                        Try this as an appetizer in front of a simple grilled steak dinner.

                                        1 ⁄4   cup white vinegar
                                        1 bay leaf
                                        11 ⁄ 2 pounds veal sweetbreads
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        1⁄ 2   cup olive oil
                                        1 pound spinach, trimmed, well washed, and dried
                                        4 slices bacon, diced small
                                        1 teaspoon sugar
                                        3 tablespoons balsamic vinegar


                                        1. Build a ﬁre in your grill.

                                     2. In a large saucepan, bring the white vinegar, bay leaf, and enough
                                water to cover the sweetbreads to a boil over high heat. Add the sweet­
                                breads and salt and pepper, lower the heat so that the water just barely
                                simmers, and poach gently for 10 minutes; drain and place the sweet­
                                breads in a bowl of ice water to cool.
                                      3. When the sweetbreads are completely cooled, drain them, dry
                                them with paper towels, and remove as much of the membrane as possi­
                                ble. Separate the meat into nuggets, toss them gently with 1⁄4 cup of the
                                olive oil, and sprinkle generously with salt and pepper. Thread the sweet­
                                breads onto four to six skewers (one per serving) and refrigerate.
                                     4. Place the spinach in a large bowl. In a large sauté pan, cook the
                                bacon slowly over medium heat until it is crisp and golden brown, 8 to 10


236           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
minutes. Drain off and discard all but 3 tablespoons of the fat, leaving the
bacon in the pan. Add the sugar, the remaining 1⁄4 cup olive oil, and the bal­
samic vinegar to the pan and bring to a boil. Pour the hot dressing over the
spinach, tossing to wilt the spinach and coat it with the dressing. Season
with salt and pepper and set aside.
      5. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you
can hold your hand 5 inches above the surface of the grill for 3 to 4 sec­
onds), place the skewers on the grill and cook until well seared and crisp
on the outside, 4 to 5 minutes per side. To check for doneness, nick, peek,
and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of one of the nuggets; it
should be warm throughout with no red, only the faintest trace of pink.
When the sweetbreads are fully cooked, remove them from the heat and
let them rest for 5 minutes.
     6. To serve, place some spinach on each plate and top with a sweet­
bread skewer.




Seared Calf ’s Liver With Bacon,                                                       THE CUT

                                                                                       Smaller than beef liver,

Onions, and Sweet-and-Sour                                                             calf’s liver is also lighter in
                                                                                       color, pale red or pink to

Madeira Sauce                                                                          yellow brown. It is usually
                                                                                       sold presliced, but if you do
                                                                                       buy your liver whole, it may
      S E RVE S 4                                                                      still have an outer mem­
                                                                                       brane on it. If so, remove it,
If you have never had calf’s liver, it is going to change your mind about liver        since it gets tough as it
                                                                                       cooks.
forever. It is a favorite of butchers as well as restaurant chefs, so it can be
hard to locate, but it is well worth the search. Delicate and rich in ﬂavor, it also   OTHER NAME
has a wonderful texture. The mistake that most cooks make with this organ              Veal liver.
meat is to overcook it, which changes its texture from silky smooth to dry and
chalky. We recommend that you cook it just to medium-rare, still pink in the           BUTCHERSPEAK

center.                                                                                You are probably only
                                                                                       going to ﬁnd true calf’s
      Some combinations can’t be beat, and one of those is liver, bacon, and           liver at a pretty high-level
onions. So here we stick to that favorite, adding a sweet-and-sour sauce ﬂa­           butcher shop. Make sure
vored with Madeira, a fortiﬁed wine originally from Portugal that makes an             that you are not fooled into
                                                                                       buying “young beef liver,”
excellent complement to veal of any kind.                                              which is merely beef liver
                                                                                       by another name, and quite
                                                                                       a different item.



                                                     VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                         237
                                8 slices bacon, diced small
                                2 red onions, peeled and thinly sliced
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                3 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                Four 8-ounce slices calf’s liver, about 1 ⁄ 2 inch thick (outer membrane
                                  removed if still present)
                                All-purpose ﬂour for dredging
                                1 cup dry Madeira
                                1 ⁄4   cup apricot preserves
                                1 ⁄4   cup balsamic vinegar
                                1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley


                                1. In a large sauté pan, cook the bacon slowly over medium heat until
                        it is crisp and golden brown, 8 to 10 minutes. Transfer the bacon to a small
                        bowl and discard all but 3 tablespoons of the fat from the pan. Add the
                        onions to the pan and cook, stirring frequently, until well browned, about
                        13 minutes. Season with salt and pepper and transfer to another small
                        bowl.
                              2. Discard the bacon fat, return the pan to medium heat, and add the
                        butter. Season the liver with salt and pepper and dredge it lightly in the
                        ﬂour. When the butter is melted, add the liver to the pan and sear for 2 to
                        3 minutes per side for medium-rare, transferring the pieces to a platter as
                        they are done. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch
                        cut in a piece of the liver; it should be slightly less done than you like it.
                        Cover the liver to keep it warm while you make the sauce.
                              3. Pour off any remaining fat and return the pan to medium-high
                        heat. Add the Madeira and bring to a simmer, stirring to dissolve the
                        brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan. Continue to simmer until the
                        liquid is reduced by half, 5 to 10 minutes. Add the preserves and cook, stir­
                        ring, for 1 minute. Stir in the vinegar, remove the pan from the heat, and
                        season the sauce with salt and pepper.
                              4. To serve, scatter the onions over the liver on the serving platter.
                        Pour the sauce over the onions and sprinkle the bacon bits and parsley
                        over the top.




238   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Seared Veal Kidneys with Roasted                                                    THE CUT

                                                                                    As with most organ meats,

Pears and Horseradish-Mustard                                                       the kidneys that come from
                                                                                    calves are the most valued.

Sauce                                                                               Easier to ﬁnd than many
                                                                                    other cuts of veal, they are
                                                                                    valued for their very tender
      S E RVE S 4                                                                   texture and their rich but
                                                                                    delicate ﬂavor. When buy­
For years, I (Doc) thought of kidneys as a faintly ridiculous English breakfast     ing calf’s kidneys, look for
                                                                                    even color; avoid any that
dish. This came, no doubt, from reading lots of English mystery novels in           have dry spots or a surface
which the obligatory country house weekend always included a breakfast              that looks dull. The kidneys
with a silver salver of kidneys on the sideboard. But calf’s kidneys are actually   should be a deep pink in
                                                                                    color, rather than the dark
a very tasty dish. Like most organ meats, they respond poorly to overcooking,       reddish-brown of beef
so keep an eye on them.                                                             kidneys.
      Here we serve the kidneys with roasted pears, for several years my
favorite breakfast dish, and add the horseradish-mustard sauce that Jim
Burke always served with kidneys when Chris worked for him at the Harvest
Restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts, many years ago.
      Even though we are big fans of browning meat in general, kidneys are
too delicate for this treatment, so if they are not done enough for your liking
after 3 to 4 minutes in the sauté pan, ﬁnish them up in the oven.

      2 ripe but ﬁrm Bosc pears, halved and cored
      2 tablespoons olive oil
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      5 tablespoons unsalted butter
      3 calf’s kidneys, trimmed
      1⁄ 2   red onion, peeled and diced small
      1 cup dry white wine
      1⁄ 2   cup heavy cream
      1 ⁄4   cup grainy mustard
      2 tablespoons grated fresh horseradish
      1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley


      1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.

      2. Rub the pears with the olive oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper, and
arrange cut side up in a roasting pan. Roast until they are well browned
and tender when pierced with a fork, about 45 minutes.
      3. In a large sauté pan, melt 3 tablespoons of the butter over medium
heat. Add the kidneys, turn the heat to medium-high, and sear for 3 to 5




                                                    VEAL: GUESS WHO’S COMING TO DINNER?                     239
                        minutes per side; transfer to an ovenproof platter as they are done. To
                        check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in one of the
                        kidneys and take a peek; it should be slightly pink inside. If they are less
                        done than you like, place the platter of kidneys in the hot oven while you
                        make the sauce.
                              4. Pour off any remaining fat and return the pan to medium heat.
                        Add the remaining 2 tablespoons butter and, when it is melted, add the
                        onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Turn
                        the heat up to medium-high, add the wine, and bring to a simmer, stirring
                        to dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan. Continue to
                        simmer until the wine is reduced by two thirds, 5 to 10 minutes. Add the
                        cream, mustard, and horseradish and simmer for 3 more minutes, then
                        remove from the heat. Season with salt and pepper and stir in the parsley.
                                5. Drizzle the kidneys generously with the sauce and serve.




240   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                                                                            LAMB:
                                                 IT                      MIGHT as
                                              WELL                      be     SPRING




W      e are big fans of lamb, mainly because this is meat with some

real f lavor to it. Earthy and rich with a faint, almost aromatic, sweet­

ness, it can stand up to strong ﬂavorings from chile peppers to garlic to cilantro. On the
other hand, the taste of lamb is also reﬁned enough for just about anyone.
       Certainly this meat has a long and honorable history as a friend of humanity. Sheep
were domesticated long before cattle or pigs, in about 9000 B.C., in northern Iraq. From that
time on, humans in much of the world were shepherds, and the meat they knew best was
lamb. Sheep became an almost universal symbol for purity and redemption in the ancient
world, the prime choice of ancient religions for sacriﬁces to the gods. Even today lamb is
the only universally accepted meat. Hindus are forbidden to eat beef, Muslims shun pork,
but no culture or religion outlaws lamb.
       Oddly enough, though, in America lamb has always been the least-consumed of the
big three red meats. In 1998, for example, the average American ate just over one pound of
lamb, compared to almost ﬁfty-three pounds of pork and some sixty-eight pounds of beef.
Lamb’s lack of popularity among American cooks is particularly puzzling given its promi­
nence in other cuisines. From the shores of North Africa and Italy to the steppes of Mon­
                                                                                                  241
golia, and nearly all the lands in between, this meat is a staple. In the Middle East, it is so
dominant that when you say “meat,” it is virtually understood you are talking about lamb.
              It’s not surprising, then, that both of us acquired our fondness for lamb while travel­
      ing in other countries. When I (Chris) was about ten years old, my parents took my sister
      and me to Europe. During the ﬁrst part of the trip, my specialty was keeping track of the
      currencies in the different countries, but when we arrived in Greece, I became a specialist in
      lamb. I clearly remember driving back from Delphi to Athens one day eating lamb skewers
      in the back seat of the car, throwing the skewer sticks on the ﬂoor in my haste to start eat­
      ing another little set of those juicy, ﬂavorful lamb cubes. On another day, we stopped at a
      taverna where a boy not much older than I was sat turning a whole baby lamb on a spit. I
      was impressed with the fact that he was given this responsibility, and even more impressed
      when his father invited me to choose the particular portion of the lamb I wanted, then
      sliced it off and handed it to me. My father and I sat down at one of the rough-hewn tables,
      sprinkled the rosy pink meat with lemon juice and coarse salt and pepper, and had at it with
      our ﬁngers.
              Inspired by these experiences, when we got back to the United States, I convinced
      my father to let me grill lamb chops, which were just about his favorite meal. They were the
      ﬁrst thing I had ever grilled and, predictably, I charred them beyond recognition. But we ate
      them anyway, and my father claimed they were the best he’d ever had. That was the begin­
      ning of the cooking career that brought me to the point where I could be writing this book,
      so to this day I still have a special fondness for lamb chops.
              I (Doc) was introduced to the pleasures of lamb later in life. Back in the late 1970s, I
      sold my car, gave up my apartment, and ﬂew to London with my friend Rick to embark on
      what turned out to be a four-month cross-continent trip to Istanbul, including a three-week
      sojourn in Morocco. In the back alleys of Tangier and at the souks in Fez, we ate tiny lamb
      skewers that had been squirted with lemon juice and rolled in fresh mint before being grilled
      on charcoal-fueled braziers. In a campground in a desert oasis near Quarzazate, a newfound
      Moroccan friend cooked us an incredible tagine of lamb and green olives, and when we
      splurged by eating at a “real” restaurant in Marrakech, I was lucky enough to choose a clas­
      sic braised lamb dish, spoon-tender and ﬂavored with almonds, saffron, and cumin. More
      such treats awaited us in Algeria, Tunisia, and Greece, so by the time we arrived in Istanbul
      and began sampling the lamb and eggplant dishes in the inexpensive restaurants of the
      European part of that amazing city, I had become a conﬁrmed lamb devotee.
              Since then, we’ve both continued to enjoy lamb in places from Malaysia to China to
      Peru. But there is no need to travel the world to ﬁnd out how fantastic lamb can be; there is
      great lamb as close as your neighborhood supermarket. That’s why it is so perplexing that
      most American home cooks, despite their recent enthusiasm for ingredients as diverse as
      pomegranate molasses and wasabi powder, continue to think of lamb only when Easter or
      Passover rolls around.
              As is so often the case, history can best explain this prejudice. At the time the Euro­
      peans came to America, the farms in much of the rest of the world (think the entire
      Mediterranean, just for starters) were small, pasture land was scarce, and the weather was
      dry. In those situations, it made most sense to raise sheep, which, unlike cows, can subsist
      on little pasture and, unlike pigs, give not only meat but also milk. In land-rich America, on



242   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
the other hand, cattle were not only easier to raise, but also more proﬁtable, at least par­
tially due to the British prohibition against the manufacture of woolen goods. So, since
colonial times, there has been a widespread feeling that lamb is somehow “un-American,”
the food of people from other, less fortunate lands. The early prejudice against lamb was
reinforced by the fact that, unlike beef and pork, it could not be converted into the colonial
version of fast food by salting or smoking.
         This negative attitude was solidiﬁed by the range wars between sheepherders and
cattle ranchers that ﬂared up in the American West during the late 1800s. Cattle ranchers
managed to successfully characterize sheep, which will eat grass right down to the roots, as
little better than four-legged locusts, and the American antipathy toward lamb became even
more ingrained.
         But it is not only history that is to blame for lamb’s relative obscurity in this country.
This meat also has somewhat of a reputation for being gamy, with too strong a ﬂavor for
many diners. This preconception seems to have originated with mutton, which is the name
given to meat from sheep that are over a year old. It is true that mutton does have quite a
strong and gamy ﬂavor. But that has little relevance today, since mutton is no longer sold
commercially in the United States except in some halal (Orthodox Muslim) butchers. In
other words, it won’t be foisted on you; you have to seek it out.
         There is another factor in lamb’s lack of acceptance, though, that’s actually based in
scientiﬁc reality. Many people associate the taste of lamb with the smell of burning lamb
fat, which does have a very “lamby” odor. This is because it is what is known as a hard fat,
meaning it has a higher melting point than the fat of beef or pork. This not only imparts an
intense aroma to the molten fat, but also gives the solid fat a kind of waxy property that
makes it less inviting than, say, beef or pork fat.
         Whatever the reasons for it, this neglect of lamb is a shame. And it’s one of those phe­
nomena that feeds on itself. Cooks who recognize half a dozen steaks and several roasts of
beef are familiar with only the leg of lamb, the loin chop, and maybe the rib chop. As a result,
there is little demand for other cuts. Since there is little demand, butchers and supermarkets
don’t display them, so consumers don’t know about them. And round and round it goes.
         We want to help break this circle by encouraging as many of you as possible to eat
all kinds of cuts of lamb. Fortunately, this is a particularly good time to start exploring the
virtues of lamb, because the quality that you ﬁnd in the stores has improved markedly over
the past decade or two. Although the lamb industry has lagged behind the pork and beef
industries in using genetics to produce the type of meat that consumers want, it is now
playing a good game of catch-up. Simply put, the cuts of lamb available today are consider­
ably larger than those that our parents bought, with a higher proportion of meat to bone.
In fact, since the 1940s, the average weight of a sheep at slaughter has increased by about 60
percent. As a result, you can easily ﬁnd an eight- or ten-pound leg of lamb in a market,
whereas in the old days, a leg that large would have come from older (and tougher) mutton.
Best of all, this increase in size has been achieved by carefully selective breeding, without
sacriﬁcing tenderness or increasing the ratio of fat to lean meat.




                                                        LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING              243
             ABOUT CUTS OF LAMB

                                 Rich but Low-Cost Section
                                              Big Money Section
                                                         Chop Section
                                                                  Versatile Roast
                                                                      Section




             So what are options for cooking lamb? Well, there are plenty.
              As with beef and veal, the easiest way to understand lamb is to divide it into four
      parts. Let’s be logical again and start with the front of the animal, the shoulder, which we
      like to call the Rich but Low-Cost Section; next comes the rib or rack, which like its coun­
      terpart in the steer or calf is the Big Money Section; this is followed by the loin, which we
      are naming the Chop Section; and ﬁnally the leg, or Versatile Roast Section. (To simplify
      things, we are including the foreleg with the shoulder and the breast with the rib section.)
              Like the chuck portion of the steer, the shoulder of the lamb is tougher than many
      other cuts but also has very deep ﬂavor. As a roast, it is one of those dual-purpose cuts: just
      tender enough to be roasted, but also tough enough to respond to the long, slow moist heat
      of braising. Chops from the shoulder are particularly nice; somewhat chewy but full of ﬂa­
      vor, they are ideal for grilling.
              The rib area of the lamb is, like prime rib in beef, very tender and quite ﬂavorful.
      This portion of the lamb is either cut into ﬂavorful little rib chops or left as lamb racks. A
      single rack makes a sophisticated and intimate dinner for two, while two racks can be spe­
      cially cut and formed into a crown roast of lamb.
              The lamb loin is also very tender. It is usually cut into butter-soft loin chops, which
      resemble tiny T-bone steaks. It can also be divided into the ultra-tender tenderloin and ﬂa­
      vorful top loin chops. The saddle, which is basically both loins of the lamb, provides a par­
      ticularly elegant roast.
              We don’t try to dictate to people the degree to which they should cook their meat.
      After all, we ﬁgure that you bought the meat and that means you get to decide how done
      you want it. But we like to cook these tender cuts of lamb to rare/medium-rare, so the
      times in our recipes are for that degree of doneness.
              Another important factor when cooking these tender cuts is thickness. We generally
      prefer thick cuts, and we think they are worth seeking out because they allow you to get a
      good sear on the outside of the meat without overcooking the interior. We realize, though,
      that it may not be possible for everyone to get hold of these thick cuts. If you can’t, by all
      means go ahead and buy the thinner version and make the recipe anyway. Just be sure you
      shorten the cooking times and check even more carefully than you usually do to be sure
      you don’t cook the lamb past the point you want it to be.
              Since lamb is brought to market very young, cuts that can be tough in, say, beef, are
      actually quite tender in lamb. The primary example of this is the leg, which is not only the
      best known cut of lamb but also the most versatile. It makes a wonderful roast, but it can


244   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                    Leg of lamb art with options TK




also be used in a more dynamic fashion, yielding chops and a smaller roast, lamb steaks and
a good amount of kebab meat, or even three “subprimal” boneless mini-roasts. (See Getting
a Leg Up, page 257, for more details.)
       When it comes to stews, lamb shines. Meat from either the shoulder or the leg is
perfectly suited to stews, and this is one of those places where lamb’s afﬁnity for strong ﬂa­
vors comes to the fore.
       And then, of course, there are lamb shanks. Served up one per person with the bone
sticking out of them, they have the same kind of visceral appeal as veal shanks, but since
they are larger they have an even more immediate resonance for the cave person within.


       OU R TOP 5 FAVOR ITE CUTS OF LAM B

       1. Shoulder lamb chop

       2. Lamb leg top roast

       3. Center-cut lamb leg steak

       4. Denver ribs

       5. Lamb kebab meat from the shoulder



       BUYING LAMB

       Shopping for lamb is relatively easy. For one thing, there is no need to spend
time looking for a “spring lamb,” the one descriptive term that most of us are vaguely
familiar with when it comes to this meat. In earlier times, this term denoted an animal that
was born in February or March, fed on milk in early spring and grass throughout the sum­
mer, and then slaughtered in the fall. Because it was young, it was tender and therefore
highly prized. The description was also a nice, catchy phrase that people latched on to
because it was easy to understand. But today this term has meaning only as a marketing
tool. Lambs may be born any time throughout the year, but almost all are brought to mar­
ket before they are a year old, most of them between ﬁve and seven months. So virtually
any lamb you buy today will have the tenderness that the seasonal label used to guarantee.
       There is, however, one situation in which “spring lamb” does have some meaning,
although it is one that few of us will encounter. Lamb that is 100 percent pasture-fed will


                                                     LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING            245
      have subtle differences in ﬂavor from season to season, because different plants are available
      for foraging. For instance, in the early spring, there is a lot of wild garlic and onion grass
      growing in the pastures of rural Pennsylvania, so the free-range lambs raised there by Jami­
      son Farms will pick up those ﬂavors.
              But in the United States, well over 80 percent of sheep raised for meat spend some time
      in feed lots before being slaughtered. This ﬁnal grain feeding makes the ﬂavor of the fat a bit
      more mild than what you get with strictly grass-fed lambs, which have a little gamier ﬂavor.
              In very high-end butcher shops, you may also occasionally see baby lamb, also
      known as milk-fed lamb. Under two months old, this is the lamb equivalent of veal, with an
      extraordinarily tender texture and very mild ﬂavor.
              The basic rule of thumb, though, is that almost all the lamb you ﬁnd will be from
      sheep under a year old, and therefore very tender. Still, it makes sense to take a look at the
      lamb you buy to be sure it is in fact what you want. So, when you go to the meat counter,
      look for lamb that is pinkish red rather than dark purplish red, since the darker the color,
      the older the lamb. The meat should also look moist and bright, rather than sticky, and the
      fat should look waxy-white. Another good way to be sure you aren’t getting old lamb is to
      look at the ends of the bones. They should be moist, red in color, and rather porous; if they
      are white and dry, look somewhere else.
              That’s about all there is to it. Like beef, lamb is graded Prime, Choice, or Select.
      However, this ranking is far less important with sheep than with cattle. Over 90 percent of
      lambs sold in the United States are graded Prime or Choice, largely because they are very
      efﬁcient converters of grain to meat. As a result, you don’t see lamb labeled by grade in
      markets, because it’s just not that much of an issue. Even if it were, choosing the grade you
      want would not be obvious. Some cooks prefer Prime because it is silkier in texture than
      Choice, while others ﬁnd it too fatty.
              These days, you see quite a lot of lamb from Australia, New Zealand, and even Ice­
      land in the stores. Like all natural products, lamb differs widely from sample to sample. On
      the whole, though, imported lamb tends to be smaller and somewhat less fatty than Amer­
      ican lamb. This is not, as you might suspect, because the lambs are younger when slaugh­
      tered, but simply because they are smaller breeds than those commonly raised in the United
      States. We encourage you to check out imported lamb for yourself, but in our opinion,
      American-raised lamb is superior for several reasons: It generally has a higher proportion of
      meat to bone, it tends to have more robust ﬂavor, and (most important) it doesn’t need to
      be frozen to get to your supermarket.
              One ﬁnal word about buying lamb. Most of us at some point or the other have heard
      mention of something called “fell” in relation to lamb. Fell is actually a thin membrane that
      covers the fat of the lamb. It is inedible and needs to be trimmed off before you cook the
      lamb, but it is really a nonissue. Almost any lamb you buy, whether from a butcher or in a
      supermarket, will already be trimmed of fell.
              Along with beef, lamb is one of the red meats that keeps relatively well. It is gener­
      ally ﬁne to keep it in the refrigerator, well wrapped, for three to ﬁve days. It will freeze,
      again well wrapped (see page 27), for as long as nine months, although we recommend
      using it within a month or two.


246   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                      RECIPES FOR
        LARGE TENDER CUTS OF LAMB

                Crown Roast of Lamb with Saffron Rice and     10 STEPS TO GREAT
                                                              ROASTED LAMB
                                        Apricot-Mint Sauce
                                                               1. Preheat the oven.
        Crusty Rack of Lamb with Raisin-Parsley Vinaigrette
                                                               2. Dry the meat.

  Straight-Up Roasted Whole Leg of Lamb over Potatoes and      3. Season the meat well.
                    Onions with Lemon, Garlic, and Oregano
                                                               4. Put the roast on a rack
                                                                  in a roasting pan, set
Crusty Grilled Butterflied Leg of Lamb with Smoky Eggplant-
                                                                  on the middle shelf of
                                                 Fig Relish       the preheated oven,
                                                                  and sear it.
Grill-Roasted Bone-in Leg of Lamb with Grilled Peaches and
                                                               5. Turn down the oven
                                 Red Onion–Cilantro Salsa
                                                                  temperature.

    Grilled Peppered Lamb Leg Top on Arugula, Fennel, and      6. Add the vegetables,
       Oranges with White Bean–Roasted Red Pepper Relish          if any.

                                                               7. Check for doneness
          Very Impressive Roasted Lamb Saddle with Peach-
                                                                  early and often.
           Pomegranate Sauce and Garlic-Roasted Tomatoes
                                                               8. Transfer the meat to a
                  Couscous-Stuffed Lamb Loin with Smooth          platter, cover loosely
                                                                  with foil, and allow
                                    Apricot-Lemon Chutney
                                                                  to rest for 10 to 20
                                                                  minutes, depending
Garlic-Studded, Mustard-Crusted Roasted Shoulder of Lamb
                                                                  on size.
       with Cherry Tomato–Ginger Confit and Rosemary Jus
                                                               9. Pour off the excess fat
                                                                  from the pan, add
                                                                  stock, deglaze, and
                                                                  simmer to reduce the
                                                                  liquid.

                                                              10. Carve the meat and
                                                                  serve, passing the jus
                                                                  separately.




                                                                                      247
THE CUT

When it comes to lamb, the
                                  Crown Roast of Lamb with
rack is pretty close to the
top of the line. If this were
                                  Saffron Rice and Apricot-Mint
beef, it would be a stand­
ing rib roast, otherwise          Sauce
known as prime rib. Since
it is lamb, not only is it                S E RVE S 4 TO 6

much smaller, but it has a
more delicate ﬂavor and is        You’ve probably seen some version of this dish in a movie, or at least in a
even more tender. What
you’re dealing with here is
                                  fancy “lifestyle” magazine. It’s so showy—and so expensive—that it’s become
basically a series of lamb        a kind of shorthand for luxury and a certain style of elegance. It also tastes
rib chops that have not           great when properly cooked.
been separated. Since it is
the rib section of the loin, it
                                          Basically, the crown roast consists of two racks of lamb that have been
is very tender, but it also       cut through the backbone and the chine bone so that they can be fashioned
has a little more ﬂavor than      into a circle that resembles a crown. Forming the crown is not all that easy, so
the center portion of the
loin. You will probably have
                                  you’ll want to have the butcher do it for you. He will also “french” the bones,
to go to a butcher shop to        a term that simply means scraping the meat away from the ends of the bones
get this cut, which is quite      so they look neat and pretty. (If you want to go the whole nine yards, you can
expensive.
                                  even buy those little French white paper hats to put on the ends of the bones

BUTCHERSPEAK
                                  after the roast comes out of the oven.)
Make sure that you ask the                There are three components to our version of this soigné dish, so
butcher to remove the thin        there’s a little coordination element to the cooking. Since the sauce can eas­
ﬂap of meat from the out­
                                  ily be reheated, we think it works best to get the sauce started, then make the
side of the rack (it is use­
less) and take off the chine      rice, then put the lamb in the oven. Of course, you could save a little time by
bone so you can cut the           making the sauce while the lamb is in the oven, which is certainly a ﬁne way
rack into chops easily.
                                  to go. But there is one good reason to get the sauce out of the way ﬁrst:
                                  You’re working with a very expensive cut of meat here, so you want to take a
                                  lot of care with it. Make sure you have a meat thermometer on hand, for exam­
                                  ple, because that’s the only way to tell when the lamb is cooked to your liking,
                                  and start checking for doneness right after you reduce the oven heat to
                                  300°F. Overcooking is the surest way to ruin this piece of meat.
                                          Of course, how you treat this cut really depends on how fancy you want
                                  the ﬁnal dish to look. If you aren’t intensely concerned with presentation and
                                  want to save time, you can simply prop the two racks up against each other
                                  like hands forming a steeple with the ﬁngers interlocking and roast them like
                                  that. This is known in the trade as an “honor guard.”
                                          Either way, rack of lamb is very easy to serve—just cut between the ribs
                                  with a knife, and you’ll have rib chops. They’re small, so we like to serve four
                                  per person.




248             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     For a really bang-up sumptuous feast, serve this with sautéed water­
cress, Potatoes Anna (page 409) or Au Gratin Potatoes (page 410), and a
lettuce salad with homemade blue cheese dressing.

     F OR TH E SAU CE

     1 teaspoon unsalted butter
     1 small red onion, peeled and diced small
     3 ⁄4   cup dry red wine
     3 ⁄4   cup red wine vinegar
     1⁄ 3   cup apricot preserves
     1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh mint
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

     FOR THE RICE

     1 tablespoon unsalted butter
     Large pinch of saffron (20 threads)
     1 tablespoon ground coriander
     1 small red onion, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced
     11 ⁄ 2 cups long-grain white rice
     3 cups water or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
     1 ⁄4   cup sliced almonds, toasted in a dry skillet over medium heat, shaken
            frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes
     3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh parsley
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

     1 lamb rib crown roast (2 racks of lamb, about 11 ⁄ 2 pounds each, frenched
         and tied in a crown shape)
     2 tablespoons olive oil
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     2 tablespoons minced garlic
     2 tablespoons freshly cracked coriander seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground
        coriander)
     1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley


      1. Make the sauce: In a medium sauté pan, melt the butter over
medium-high heat. Add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until
translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the wine, vinegar, and preserves and sim­
mer until the sauce is reduced to about 1 cup, 35 to 40 minutes. Remove
the pan from the heat, add the mint, and season with salt and pepper.
     2. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

     3. Make the rice: In a medium sauté pan, melt the butter over
medium heat. Add the saffron, coriander, and onion and cook, stirring
occasionally, until the onion is translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the rice and


                                                            LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING   249
                        stir to coat with the oil, then add the water. Bring to a simmer, cover,
                        reduce the heat to low, and cook until all the liquid has been absorbed, 15
                        to 18 minutes. Stir in the almonds and parsley and season with salt and
                        pepper. Cover the pan with a tea towel, put the lid on, and set aside.
                              4. While the rice is cooking, dry the lamb with paper towels, then
                        rub it with the olive oil and sprinkle it generously with salt and pepper. In
                        a small bowl, combine the garlic, coriander, and parsley and mix well, then
                        rub this mixture all over the meat, pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
                        Place the lamb on a rack in a roasting pan and roast for 20 minutes. Reduce
                        the heat to 300°F and continue to cook 5 to 15 minutes more for medium-
                        rare, which is how we like it, or longer if you like it more well-done. To
                        check for doneness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the
                        roast and let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 120°F is rare,
                        126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and
                        160°F is well-done.
                              5. When the lamb is done, transfer it to a serving platter and pile the
                        saffron rice in the center. Cover with aluminum foil and allow the meat to
                        rest for 10 to 20 minutes. (While it is resting, you may want to reheat the
                        sauce.)
                             6. To serve, spoon out the rice onto the plates. Cut the butcher’s
                        twine and slice the racks into individual chops. Top the rice with the chops
                        and pass the sauce separately.




250   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Crusty Rack of Lamb with Raisin-                                                    THE CUT

                                                                                    See Crown Roast of Lamb

Parsley Vinaigrette                                                                 (page 248) for details on
                                                                                    rack of lamb.

      S E RVE S 2
                                                                                    OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

                                                                                    Lamb leg top roast, known
We can’t think of a nicer, more intimate, more celebratory meal for two peo­        in the restaurant business
ple than this little mini-roast, the rack of lamb. Because the rack is so small,    as a “lamb top,” makes an
we sear it on top of the stove in a sauté pan rather than searing in the oven as    excellent substitute here if
                                                                                    you can get it.
we would a larger roast. We then coat it with a simple mustard sauce and
some ﬂavored crumbs and ﬁnish cooking it in the oven.
      We serve the rack with a simple raisin-parsley vinaigrette, which speaks
to us of the Middle Eastern expertise in combining different ﬂavors with lamb.
      Serve this with couscous, a Romaine or arugula salad, and perhaps
Creamed Spinach (page 431).

      1 tablespoon grated lemon zest (yellow part only)
      1 teaspoon minced garlic
      1 tablespoon cracked coriander seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 teaspoons ground coriander)
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh bread crumbs
      2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh thyme or oregano
      2 tablespoons olive oil
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar
      1 ⁄4   cup grainy mustard
      1 rack of lamb, about 1 pound

      FOR THE VINAIGRETTE
      1⁄ 3   cup extra virgin olive oil
      2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
      1 tablespoon dry sherry
      1 ⁄4   cup dark raisins
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.

      2. In a small bowl, combine the lemon zest, garlic, coriander, bread
crumbs, thyme, 1 tablespoon of the oil, and salt and pepper. Mix well and
set aside. In another small bowl, combine the balsamic vinegar and mus­
tard and mix well; set aside.




                                                          LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                   251
                                       3. Dry the rack of lamb with paper towels and sprinkle it generously
                                 with salt and pepper. In a large ovenproof sauté pan, heat the remaining 1
                                 tablespoon oil over high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the lamb and
                                 sear until well browned on both sides, about 5 minutes per side. Remove
                                 the lamb from the pan. Paint the top and sides of the meat with the mus­
                                 tard mixture and then pat the bread crumb mixture all over so it adheres to
                                 the lamb.
                                       4. Put the lamb back in the sauté pan, place in the oven, and roast for
                                 about 20 minutes for rare, or about 25 minutes for medium-rare, which is
                                 how we like it, or longer if you like it more well-done. To check for done-
                                 ness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the meat and let it
                                 sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is
                                 medium-rare, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-
                                 done. When the lamb is done to your liking, remove it from the oven,
                                 cover it loosely with aluminum foil, and allow it to rest, for 10 to 20 min­
                                 utes before carving.
                                       5. Meanwhile, make the vinaigrette: In a medium bowl, combine the
                                 olive oil, lemon juice, sherry, raisins, parsley, and salt and pepper and whisk
                                 to mix well.
                                       6. Cut the rack into single or double chops, as you wish, and serve,
                                 passing the vinaigrette separately.




THE CUT

The name says it all: This is
                                 Straight-Up Roasted Whole Leg of
the rear leg of the lamb.
Since lambs are small and
                                 Lamb over Potatoes and Onions
young, the whole leg is not
too big to ﬁt in your oven.      with Lemon, Garlic, and Oregano
For the same reasons, the
leg is quite tender, even                S E RVE S 8 TO 10
though it is used to move
the animal around and,
                                 Leg is among our favorite cuts of lamb, for its near-ideal combination of ﬂavor
therefore, has a good deal
of connective tissue. In         and tenderness. Like other roasts, it’s also an easy way to feed a crowd. A lot
other words, the leg of          of people must agree with our assessment, because the leg is the second
lamb provides an excellent
                                 most popular and readily available cut of lamb, after loin chops.
combination of ﬂavor and
tenderness. Half legs are                Here we roast a whole lamb leg on a bed of potatoes and onions so the
also readily available for       juice from the lamb drips down onto the vegetables as it roasts. Some of the
those occasions when
                                 potatoes and onions will stick to the pan as the roast cooks, but to us those
you’re not feeding a large
                                 are the very best, slightly blackened and permeated with lamb juices. We



252            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
also throw some lemons into the mix; they become a little sweet as they roast      crowd. We prefer the sirloin
                                                                                   half, nearer the hip,
and give the vegetables a wonderful ﬂavor.
                                                                                   because it is both more
     The general rule with a bone-in leg of lamb is that you get about a 50        tender and meatier than
percent yield. So if you are looking to serve each person about half a pound       the shank end. See Getting
                                                                                   a Leg Up (page 257) for
of meat, you need to allow a pound per person.
                                                                                   ways to get the most out of
     Serve this with a good loaf of crusty bread and a salad of spinach and        a leg of lamb.
red onion.
                                                                                    OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
     1⁄ 2   cup minced garlic                                                      Any bone-in lamb roast
     1 cup chopped fresh oregano                                                   works great in this recipe.
     1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
     1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt, plus more to taste
     1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper, plus more to taste
     One 10-pound bone-in leg of lamb
     8 medium potatoes, peeled and thinly sliced
     2 large red onions, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced
     3 whole lemons, very thinly sliced and seeded
     1 ⁄4   cup olive oil


     1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

      2. In a small bowl, combine the garlic, oregano, olive oil, salt, and
pepper and mix well. Dry the lamb well with paper towels. With the point
of a paring knife, cut 8 or 10 slits about 2 inches deep in the roast. Push
some of the oregano mixture into these slits and into any gaps between
the bone and the meat on the ends of the roast, then rub the rest all over
the outside of the roast.
      3. In a large roasting pan, combine the potatoes, onions, and lemons.
Drizzle with the olive oil, sprinkle generously with salt and pepper, and
toss to coat.
       4. Place the lamb on a rack, place it in the roasting pan with the
potato mixture, and roast until well seared, about 20 minutes. Stir the
potato-onion mixture around, reduce the oven temperature to 300°F, and
continue to cook until the lamb is done the way you like it. To check for
doneness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast and
let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is
medium-rare, which is how we like it, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-
well, and 160°F is well-done. Transfer the roast to a cutting board, cover
loosely with foil, and allow to rest for 10 to 20 minutes.                          COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

                                                                                   Any leftover lamb is a great
     5. Carve the lamb into thin slices and serve, accompanied by the              addition to a white bean
potatoes and onions.                                                               salad.




                                                             LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING              253
THE CUT

See Straight-Up Roasted
                                 Crusty Grilled Butterf lied Leg of
Whole Leg of Lamb (page
252) for details on the leg
                                 Lamb with Smoky Eggplant-Fig
of lamb.
                                 Relish
BUTCHERSPEAK
                                         S E RVE S 6 TO 8
Ask your butcher to bone,
trim, and ﬂatten the lamb
leg so it is as uniformly        Grilled lamb is the absolute rock-solid classic entrée of the Middle East and
thick as possible. He will       Greece, and for good reason. The smoky ﬂavor and crusty sear that lamb picks
also remove the fell, the
                                 up from a grilling ﬁre work perfectly with the pronounced ﬂavor of the meat.
tough exterior fat layer that
is characteristic of lamb.               Here we are using a boned and butterﬂied leg of lamb, which is pretty
                                 easy to cook and carve. This is a big piece of lamb, though, so we are build­
                                 ing a two-level ﬁre for the “sear and move” technique. Make sure that you get
                                 the meat seared really well, then move it off to the other side of the grill to ﬁn­
                                 ish cooking. A big grill is very handy here, because lamb has plenty of fat, so
                                 to avoid ﬂare-ups, you may have to move the meat back and forth a couple of
                                 times from the hot to the cool part of the grill as it sears. But you can minimize
                                 the need for this by only ﬂipping the meat over once while it’s searing, no
                                 matter how often you have to slide it back and forth.
                                         The relish here may sound a little offbeat, but it is out of this world. You
                                 might want to make a double or triple batch, because people will be eating it
                                 by the spoonful. To save a little time, you can put the eggplant and onions for
                                 the relish on the hotter side of the grill (it will have cooled down to medium-
                                 hot by this time) while the lamb ﬁnishes cooking on the cooler side.
                                         Serve this with a Spicy Yellow Squash Hobo Pack (page 441) and a
                                 pasta salad or spinach salad.

                                         3 tablespoons cumin seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons ground cumin)
                                         3 tablespoons coriander seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons ground coriander)
                                         1 ⁄4   cup black peppercorns (or 2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper)
                                         1 ⁄4   cup dried oregano, crumbled
                                         3 tablespoons kosher salt
                                         One 4- to 5-pound boned and butterﬂied leg of lamb, 2 to 21 ⁄ 2 inches thick
                                         10 large garlic cloves, peeled and halved lengthwise
                                         1 ⁄4   cup olive oil

                                         FOR THE RELISH

                                         2 cups dry red wine
                                         2 tablespoons sugar




254            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      2 tablespoons honey
      1⁄ 2   cinnamon stick (or 1 teaspoon ground cinnamon)
      Minced zest of 1 ⁄ 2 lemon (yellow part only; about 2 tablespoons)
      8 ounces dried ﬁgs, quartered (about 11 ⁄ 2 cups)
      1 large eggplant, cut into 1 ⁄ 2-inch slices
      1 large onion, peeled and quartered
      3 tablespoons olive oil
      1 tablespoon minced garlic
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley


      1. Light a two-level ﬁre in your grill.

      2. If using whole spices, put the cumin, coriander, and peppercorns
in a small heavy sauté pan and toast over medium heat, shaking the pan
frequently, until the spices are fragrant, 2 to 3 minutes. Cool, then coarsely
grind the spices in a coffee grinder, spice grinder, or mortar and pestle. Stir
in the crumbled oregano and salt and set aside. (If using ground spices,
simply combine and mix well.)
      3. With a paring knife, make 20 small slits in the surface of the lamb
and push a piece of garlic into each one. Rub the lamb with the oil, then
rub it all over with the spice mixture, pressing lightly to be sure it adheres.
       4. When the ﬂames have died down and the coals are covered with
white ash, shove about three quarters of the coals to one side of the grill,
for a hot ﬁre (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1
to 2 seconds) and about one quarter to the other side, for a medium ﬁre
(you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds).
Place the lamb directly over the hot section of the ﬁre, fat side up, and sear
well, about 10 minutes. Turn and sear the second side, about 10 minutes
more. Move to the medium-hot side of the grill and cook, turning once,
for 5 to 10 minutes more, until the meat is done to your liking. To check
for doneness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast,
let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is
medium-rare, which is how we like it, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-
well, and 160°F is well-done. If you don’t want to use a thermometer,
check for doneness by the nick, peek, and cheat method: Make a 1⁄4-inch
cut in the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less done than you
like it. When the lamb is done, remove it from the grill, cover it loosely
with foil, and let it rest for 10 to 20 minutes.




                                                          LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING   255
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE                   5. Meanwhile, make the relish: In a small saucepan, combine the
If you have any leftover          wine, sugar, honey, cinnamon, lemon zest, and ﬁgs, stir, and bring just to a
lamb, it is a fantastic addi­
                                  simmer over medium-high heat. Reduce the heat and simmer gently for 12
tion to a lentil or couscous
salad.
                                  minutes. Remove from the heat and set aside.
                                       6. Rub the eggplant slices and onion quarters with the olive oil and
                                  season with the garlic and salt and pepper. Grill the vegetables over the
                                  medium-hot ﬁre until they are well browned and the eggplant slices are
                                  moist all the way through, 5 to 6 minutes per side. Let cool slightly, then
                                  chop the vegetables and add them to the ﬁg sauce. Add the lemon juice
                                  and parsley, stir well to combine, and season with salt and pepper.
                                          7.   Cut the lamb into thin slices against the grain and serve with the
                                  relish.




256             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
GETTING A LEG UP
Well known as an excellent roast, leg of lamb can also be used in a more dynamic fashion. Buy a leg, spend
a few minutes talking to your butcher, and you can walk away from the meat counter with some very nice
chops as well as a user-friendly roast, or with meaty steaks and enough tender cubes for several meals of
kebabs.
    The ﬁrst option is to have the butcher cut four or ﬁve thick chops from the sirloin or butt end of the leg.
These chops have the advantage of being cheaper than chops from the rib and more tender than those from
the shoulder. As a point of comparison, they are identical in bone and muscle structure to the steaks from
the sirloin of the cow. Some butchers actually call them steaks to distinguish them from chops from other
parts of the lamb.
    One note of caution: It is a good idea to check out the ﬁrst chop taken from the end before the butcher
wraps up the meat. This chop sometimes has a large knot of white fat in it. If that is the case, ask the butcher
to make that meat into cubes for skewers or stew and cut another chop. Fortunately, lamb freezes well, so
you can keep the cubes to add to another batch in the future.
    With the chops removed, what remains is a four- to ﬁve-pound roast. This is the perfect size for many
cooks, who ﬁnd a whole leg not only too large for most meals but too large for their roasting pans as well.
This smaller roast will also be of a more uniform thickness, which translates to more even cooking.
    A second option for dividing the leg is to cut about half a dozen thick steaks from the center. These sub­
stantial but tender center-cut steaks, which resemble ham steaks, can be cooked in the same way as leg
chops. Once the steaks are cut from the center, the remaining two portions of the leg can be cut into cubes
for skewers.
    Yet another approach is to ask the butcher to divide the leg into the three boneless “subprimal” roasts,
the top roast, bottom roast, and tip roast. While our favorite among these is the top, all three are very nice
little roasts. This will leave you with a nice big shank, plus some scraps that can be turned into ground lamb.
    Of course, if you prefer, you can also roast the entire leg in traditional fashion.




                                                         LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                         257
THE CUT

See Straight-Up Roasted
                                Grill-Roasted Bone-in Leg of
Whole Leg of Lamb (page
252) for details on leg of
                                Lamb with Grilled Peaches and
lamb.
                                Red Onion–Cilantro Salsa
                                        S E RVE S 8 TO 10



                                To our taste buds, bone-in meat has a rich, deep taste that can’t be matched
                                by anything else in the known world. Here we start with a bone-in leg of lamb,
                                which already has great ﬂavor, then add a barbecue-style spice rub, a sweet-
                                sour glaze, and the unbeatable ﬂavor that comes from slow cooking over the
                                smoke and heat of a live ﬁre. Throw in some grilled peaches and a simple
                                onion salsa, and you’ve got a pretty astounding combination of tastes and
                                textures.
                                        Of course, if you’re in a rush, you can skip the peaches or the salsa or
                                even the glaze, but when you’ve got a little time, it’s deﬁnitely worth making
                                the whole shebang.
                                        To carve a bone-in leg of lamb, what you want to do is ﬁrst take a cou­
                                ple of slices off the thick end and set them aside. Next, grab the leg from the
                                shank (thin) end, hold it up at an angle, and cut as many long horizontal slices
                                off the top of it as you can, continuing until you hit the bone. Turn the leg over
                                and do the same on the opposite side. Finally, cut away any meat that is still
                                attached to the bone. Don’t throw the bone away, though; keep it for making
                                an intensely ﬂavorful white bean soup.
                                        Serve this with Latin-Style Black Beans and Rice (page 422) or just
                                plain steamed white rice, some tortillas or crusty bread, and a simple green
                                salad, and you’ve got one ﬁne feast.

                                        FOR THE SALSA

                                        1 large red onion, peeled and diced small
                                        1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
                                        1⁄ 3   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
                                        5 to 10 dashes Tabasco sauce, or to taste
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                        FOR THE GLAZE
                                        1 ⁄4   cup red wine vinegar
                                        1 ⁄4   cup molasses
                                        1 ⁄4   cup pineapple juice (or substitute orange juice)
                                        1 ⁄4   cup catsup
                                        2 tablespoons minced canned chipotle peppers in adobo




258           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1⁄ 2   cup cumin seeds (or 1 ⁄4 cup ground cumin)                               COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE
      1⁄ 2   cup coriander seeds (or 1 ⁄4 cup ground coriander)                       If you have any lamb left
      1 ⁄4                                                                            over, use it as a substitute
             cup kosher salt
                                                                                      for ground lamb in New
      1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper                                         School Shepherd’s Pie
      1 ⁄4   cup paprika                                                              (page 311).
      1 ⁄4   cup packed dark brown sugar
      One 10-pound bone-in leg of lamb, trimmed of all but 1 ⁄4 inch of surface fat
      5 ripe peaches, halved and pitted
      3 tablespoons olive oil
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Start a ﬁre well over to one side of a large kettle grill, using enough
coals to ﬁll half a shoe box.
      2. Make the salsa: In a small bowl, combine the onion, cilantro, lime
juice, Tabasco, and salt and pepper and mix well; set aside.
     3. Make the glaze: In another small bowl, combine the vinegar,
molasses, pineapple juice, catsup, and chipotles and mix well; set aside.
        4. In a third small bowl, combine the cumin, coriander, salt, pepper,
paprika, and sugar and mix well. Dry the lamb with paper towels and rub
it all over with this mixture, pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
      5. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are covered with white
ash, place the lamb on the grill on the side away from the coals, being care­
ful that none of the meat is directly over the coals. Put the lid on the grill
with the vents open one quarter of the way. Cook, adding a handful of
fresh charcoal about every 30 minutes, until the meat reaches the internal
temperature you like, 11⁄2 to 2 hours for medium-rare. To check for done-
ness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast, let it sit
for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is medium-
rare, which is how we like it, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and
160°F is well-done. During the last 2 minutes of cooking, brush the lamb
all over with the glaze. Remove the lamb from the grill, cover it loosely
with foil, and let it rest for 10 to 15 minutes.
      6. While the lamb is cooking, grill the peaches: Brush the peaches
with the olive oil, sprinkle them with salt and pepper, and place on the grill
right over the hot coals. Cook until nicely browned, 5 to 7 minutes. During
the last minute of cooking, brush the peach halves with the glaze.
     7. Carve the lamb and serve it with the peaches and salsa, passing any
remaining glaze on the side.




                                                             LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                  259
THE CUT

The lamb leg top roast is
                                 Grilled Peppered Lamb Leg Top
the equivalent of the beef
top round, but smaller and
                                 on Arugula, Fennel, and Oranges
more tender. It is what is
known as a “subprimal,”          with White Bean–Roasted Red
which is to say a smaller
cut fashioned from one of        Pepper Relish
the primals, the larger cuts
into which animals are                   S E RVE S 2
butchered for the whole­
sale market. Shaped
                                 Right here is one of my (Chris’s) very favorite cuts of lamb. You won’t ﬁnd this
almost like a large softball,
the top roast is one of          in a supermarket, but if you go to a butcher, he will most likely have it, espe­
three boneless subprimals        cially if he does any food service business. In the restaurant business, we call
that can be cut from the
                                 this a “lamb top.” It weighs about a pound or a little more and although it looks
lamb leg. (The other two
are the lamb leg bottom          almost like a giant ﬁlet mignon, it is actually a mini-roast, which is about my
and lamb leg tip.) Like          favorite type of cut. I use lamb top all the time at the East Coast Grill. Rela­
other cuts with the label
                                 tively free of connective tissue, it’s not only the largest single muscle in the
“top,” its name is derived
not from its position on the     leg of lamb but also the most tender. It is ideal for grilling, it makes a beautiful
animal but from its position     contiguous slice, and people go wild for it.
on the butcher’s table,
                                         Here we use the classic “sear and move” grilling technique, then thinly
where it faces up when the
butcher does the carving.        slice the lamb and serve it on top of a Mediterranean-style salad with a little
                                 white bean relish. To segment the oranges, peel them with a sharp knife,
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           removing the white pith entirely, then cut between the membranes and
You can use any small            remove each section whole, taking care to remove the seeds.
boneless lamb roast in this
recipe, but it should be no
                                         You’ve got meat, you’ve got salad, you’ve got relish—all you need with this
larger than 11 ⁄ 2 pounds.       is some good bread and maybe Roasted Garlic Mashed Potatoes (page 413).


                                         FOR THE RELISH

                                         1 teaspoon minced garlic
                                         3 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
                                         3 tablespoons olive oil
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh basil
                                         2 roasted red bell peppers, peeled and seeded, diced small
                                         1⁄ 2   cup cooked or drained canned white beans
                                         1 ⁄4   cup chopped pitted Kalamata olives (or substitute any briny black olive)
                                         5 scallions, thinly sliced (white and green parts)
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                         One 1-pound lamb top round roast
                                         2 tablespoons kosher salt
                                         3 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper




260            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      FOR THE SALAD                                                                   COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

      1 small bunch arugula, trimmed, washed, and dried                               If by chance you have any
      1⁄ 2                                                                            lamb left over, slice it very
             small red onion, peeled and thinly sliced
                                                                                      thin and put it between two
      1 orange, peeled and cut into segments (see headnote above)                     slices of bread with grainy
      1⁄ 2   small fennel bulb, tough outer layer removed and very thinly sliced      mustard and arugula for a
      1⁄ 3   cup extra virgin olive oil                                               very classy lamb sandwich.
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Light a two-level ﬁre in your grill, putting about three quarters of
the charcoal on one side of the grill bed and one quarter on the other side.
      2. Make the relish: In a medium bowl, whisk together the garlic,
vinegar, olive oil, and basil. Add the red peppers, beans, olives, and scal­
lions and mix well. Season with salt and pepper; set aside.
      3. Dry the lamb with paper towels and rub it all over with the salt
and pepper. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are covered with
ash, place the lamb over the hot section. Sear very well on both sides,
about 10 minutes per side. Move to the medium-hot side of the grill and
continue to cook until the meat reaches the internal temperature you like,
4 to 6 minutes per side for medium-rare. To check for doneness, insert a
meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast, let it sit for 5 seconds,
then read the temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is medium-rare, which is
how we like it, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-
done. Remove from the grill, cover loosely with foil, and allow to rest for
10 minutes.
      4. Make the salad: In a large bowl, combine the arugula, onion,
orange segments, and fennel. Drizzle with the olive oil and lemon juice
and season with salt and pepper. Toss well and divide between two dinner
plates.
       5. Slice the lamb against the grain into 1 ⁄4- to 1 ⁄ 2-inch slices. Fan the
slices over the salads and top each with a spoonful of the relish, passing the
remaining relish on the side.




                                                             LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                  261
THE CUT

As our friend Mark Bittman
                                 Very Impressive Roasted Lamb
says, “You’ll know a saddle
of lamb when you see
                                 Saddle with Peach-Pomegranate
it–it’s where you would sit
if you were trying to ride       Sauce and Garlic-Roasted
the lamb.” To be a bit more
technical, the saddle is the     Tomatoes
loin area of the lamb,
extending from the last rib              S E RVE S 4 TO 5
to the sirloin area. As such,
it contains the most tender
                                 Okay, let’s be honest. To attack this recipe, you are going to have to be a seri­
muscles, so it is a very
deluxe piece of meat. While      ous lamb fan, and you’ll need a cooperative butcher to boot. But as is often
a whole saddle is going to       the case, when you take the risk, you will be fully rewarded. If you don’t
set you back a fair amount,
                                 already have a butcher who considers you a particularly worthy customer, you
it is not as expensive as it
would be if it were divided      will after you ask him to create this cut for you. Because in asking for this cut,
up and sold as, for exam­        you are honoring meat.
ple, double loin chops. To
                                         What you are going to do is have the butcher take a full lamb loin and
get this cut, you’re deﬁ­
nitely going to have to call     bone it out for you. But make sure he leaves the “ﬂaps” on and gives you the
your butcher in advance.         spine bone, because what you are going to do then is to put one rub on the
                                 inside of the saddle and another on the outside, wrap the meat back up around
                                 the bone, and roast it. After it’s roasted, you take the bone out and carve it up.
                                 It’s deﬁnitely some work, but the inside-rub/outside-rub effect is amazing, and
                                 when you serve this up, you’re going to feel like a bona ﬁde lamb genius.
                                         If there is any part of the world that has specialized in lamb cookery
                                 over the centuries, it would have to be the Middle East. To honor that, we are
                                 making a simple sauce ﬂavored with peaches and pomegranate molasses for
                                 this lamb feast.
                                         Serve this with Rice Pilaf with Lime Zest, Pine Nuts, and Aromatic
                                 Spices (page 417) and Minted Fresh Peas (page 428).

                                         FOR RUB #1
                                         1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                         1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                         1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                         FOR RUB #2
                                         1 ⁄4   cup cracked coriander seeds (or 2 tablespoons ground coriander)
                                         1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt
                                         1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper

                                         One 6-pound lamb saddle, spine boned out and put back into place, ﬂap
                                           left on




262            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     F O R T H E T O M AT O E S

     1 tablespoon extra virgin olive oil
     1⁄ 3   cup fresh bread crumbs
     1 tablespoon minced garlic
     3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh parsley
     4 plum tomatoes, cored and halved
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


     2 medium red onions, peeled and diced small
     1 peach, pitted and diced small
     1 cup dry red wine
     1 ⁄4   cup pomegranate molasses


     1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

      2. Make the rubs: Combine the olive oil, garlic, parsley, and salt and
pepper in a small bowl and mix well. Combine the coriander, salt, and pep­
per in a second small bowl and mix well.
      3. Remove the spine bone that the butcher has cut away from the rest
of the saddle and generously rub the garlic-parsley mixture all over the
inside saddle. Replace the bone and re-form the roast, placing the tender­
loins under the loin and above the bone. Tie the roast ﬁrmly in several
places with kitchen twine. Rub the outside of the saddle with the corian­
der rub. Place the lamb on a rack in a roasting pan and roast until well
browned, about 20 minutes.
      4. While the roast is browning, prepare the garlic tomatoes: In a
small bowl, combine the oil, bread crumbs, garlic, and parsley and mix
well. Place the tomato halves on a foil-lined baking sheet, place one eighth
of the garlic mixture on each one, and season with salt and pepper. Mean­
while, put the tomatoes on the shelf below the lamb and cook until the
bread crumbs are crisp and golden brown, about 30 minutes.
       5. Reduce the oven temperature to 300°F, add the onions and
peaches to the roasting pan, and roast until the lamb reaches the internal
temperature you like, about 20 minutes more for medium-rare. To check
for doneness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast,
let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is
medium-rare, which is how we like it, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-
well, and 160°F is well-done.
       6. When the lamb is done, remove it from the roasting pan, leaving
the onions and peaches in the pan. Cover the lamb loosely with foil and let
it rest for 10 minutes.


                                                       LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING   263
                                       7. Meanwhile, make the sauce: Remove the excess fat from the roast­
                                 ing pan and place the pan on the stove over two burners on medium-high
                                 heat. Add the wine, stirring to dissolve the brown crusty stuff stuck to the
                                 bottom of the pan, bring to a simmer, and simmer until the liquid is
                                 reduced by one quarter, about 5 minutes. Add the pomegranate molasses,
                                 season with salt and pepper, and cover over low heat to keep warm.
                                      8. Cut the twine from the lamb, remove the spine bone, and cut the
                                 meat in thick slices against the grain. Drizzle generously with the peach-
                                 pomegranate sauce and serve, accompanied by the roasted tomatoes.



THE CUT

This is a boned saddle of
                                 Couscous-Stuffed Lamb Loin with
lamb, which is the two loins
of the animal. In other
                                 Smooth Apricot-Lemon Chutney
words, it’s basically a dou­
ble boned lamb loin roast.               S E RVE S 5

See Very Impressive
Roasted Lamb Saddle              Years ago, a roasted saddle of lamb was a classic “high elegant” dish, served
(page 262) for more details
on this cut, which you will
                                 on special occasions in grand homes where the cook, not the owner, did the
deﬁnitely have to get from       cooking. Now it has gone out of favor, and the loins (which make up the sad­
a butcher.                       dle) are usually cut into chops. But for a really spectacular dinner, it is worth
                                 calling your butcher and asking him to bone out a saddle of lamb for you so
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                 you can make this dish.
You can apply the ﬂavor
principles of this recipe to             Basically what you do here is lay the lamb loins out ﬂat, spread the
a roast leg of lamb. Just        couscous stufﬁng out on top of them, lay the tenderloin over the stufﬁng, then
follow the general direc­
                                 roll the loins up around it, and tie them securely with string. After that, it’s just
tions in Straight-Up
Roasted Whole Leg of             a matter of browning in a high oven and ﬁnishing in a medium-low oven as
Lamb (page 252) for roast­       usual. Stufﬁng the lamb with the couscous brings the grains into direct con­
ing the leg, then make the
                                 tact with the lamb juices, which makes for a much more ﬂavorful side dish.
couscous separately and
serve the lamb with the                  The chutney here is one of our favorites, with intense spikes of sweet,
couscous and chutney on          tart, and hot that get your mouth excited with each bite. Don’t worry about the
the side.
                                 peels on the lemons; they get nice and soft during the half hour of simmering.
                                         Serve this with pita bread, a Romaine lettuce salad with a simple lemon
                                 vinaigrette, and Roasted Asparagus (page 427).

                                         FOR THE CHUTNEY
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh ginger
                                         1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                         1 medium red onion, peeled and cut into eighths
                                         1 tablespoon minced fresh chile peppers of your choice, or to taste
                                         1 cup cider vinegar



264            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      11 ⁄ 2 cups dried apricots diced small (about 8 ounces)
      2 lemons, quartered lengthwise, seeded, and quarters cut crosswise into
          thin slices
      1 cup sugar
      1⁄ 2   cup fresh pomegranate seeds (or substitute 1 ⁄ 2 cup currants)
      Kosher salt to taste

      2 cups instant couscous
      1 cup boiling water
      2 tablespoons fresh thyme (or 1 tablespoon dried thyme)
      1 to 2 teaspoons red pepper ﬂakes, or more to taste
      3 tablespoons olive oil
      1 medium onion, peeled and diced small
      1 tablespoon minced garlic
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      1 boneless lamb saddle with tenderloin, ﬂaps left on


     1. Make the chutney: In a blender, puree the ginger, garlic, onion,
and chiles with the cider vinegar. Transfer to a medium nonreactive
saucepan and add the apricots, lemons, and sugar. Bring to a boil over
medium heat, then reduce the heat to low and simmer until the fruit is
very soft and the chutney has thickened, about 30 minutes. Stir in the
pomegranate seeds and season with salt. Cover and refrigerate.
      2. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

       3. Prepare the couscous: In a medium bowl, combine the couscous
with the water and allow it to sit for 5 minutes, then ﬂuff it with a fork. Stir
in the thyme and pepper ﬂakes. In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over
medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and cook,
stirring occasionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic
and cook, stirring, for 1 minute more. Add the onion and garlic to the
couscous, mixing well. Season with salt and pepper.
      4. Dry the lamb with paper towels, sprinkle the inner surface gener­
ously with salt and pepper, and spread it evenly with the couscous ﬁlling,
leaving about a 1-inch border around the edges. Place the trimmed tender­
loin lengthwise across the center of the ﬁlling, roll the lamb saddle up
around it, and tie ﬁrmly at several locations with kitchen twine.
     5. Place the roast on a rack in a large roasting pan and roast for 20
minutes to brown. Reduce the oven temperature to 300°F and continue to
cook until the meat reaches the internal temperature you like, about 25
minutes for medium-rare. To check for doneness, insert a meat ther­
mometer into the dead center of the roast and let it sit for 5 seconds, then


                                                              LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING   265
                                 read the temperature: 120°F is rare, 126°F is medium-rare, which is how
                                 we like it, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-
                                 done. When the roast is done, remove it from the oven, cover it loosely
                                 with foil, and let it rest for 10 minutes.
                                      6. Slice the lamb into 1-inch-thick slices and serve, passing the chut­
                                 ney on the side.

THE CUT

See Mango-Braised Lamb
                                 Garlic-Studded, Mustard-Crusted
Shoulder (page 275) for
more information on this
                                 Roasted Shoulder of Lamb with
cut. You’ll probably need to
go to the butcher for it.        Cherry Tomato–Ginger Confit and
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                 Rosemary Jus
A bone-in half leg of lamb
                                         S E RVE S 6
is an excellent substitute
for the shoulder roast in
this recipe.                     When roasting, we generally prefer bone-in meat. We like the heft of the
                                 bone, we like the meat that is close to the bone, and, although we have never
BUTCHERSPEAK
                                 found anyone who has a fully satisfactory scientiﬁc explanation for it, we just
Ask the butcher if he can
                                 think meat cooked bone-in tastes a little bit better. Every butcher and meat
give you the rib side of the
shoulder; it’s the more          aﬁcionado we have talked to agrees, so there must be something to it.
tender portion, so a little              Here we are roasting a bone-in shoulder of lamb, which is very ﬂavorful, if
better for roasting.
                                 a little bit chewier than other lamb roasts such as the leg or the loin. We push
                                 half cloves of garlic into the meat and coat it with grainy mustard before it goes
                                 into the oven, then serve it with a tomato-ginger conﬁt and ﬂavor the pan sauce
                                 with rosemary, another great lamb accompaniment. So, all in all, there are
                                 going to be a lot of rich ﬂavors going on when you bring this to the table.
                                         Serve this with Roasted Potatoes with Black Olives (page 414) and a
                                 salad of arugula and blue cheese.

                                         One 5- to 6-pound bone-in lamb shoulder roast
                                         10 cloves garlic, peeled and halved lengthwise
                                         1⁄ 2   cup grainy mustard
                                         1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt, plus more to taste
                                         1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked white pepper (or substitute black pepper), plus more
                                                to taste
                                         2 medium carrots, peeled and diced small
                                         2 stalks celery, diced small
                                         1 medium onion, peeled and diced small

                                         FOR THE CONFIT

                                         1 medium red onion, peeled and diced small
                                         1 pint cherry tomatoes, stemmed


266            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
      2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
      2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 lemon)
      2 tablespoons brown sugar
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      1 cup lamb or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      1 cup dry red wine
      1⁄ 2   cup balsamic vinegar
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh rosemary needles


      1.     Preheat the oven to 350°F.
      2. With a paring knife, make 20 small slits in the surface of the lamb
and push a half garlic clove into each one. In a small bowl, combine the
mustard, salt, and white pepper and mix well. Rub this mixture generously
over the meat, place the meat in a roasting pan, and surround with it the
carrots, celery, and onion.
       3. Place the lamb in the oven and roast until it is done the way you
like it, 1 hour to 1 hour and 10 minutes for medium-rare. To check for
doneness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast and
let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 120° is rare, 126°F is
medium-rare, which is how we like it, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-
well, and 160°F is well-done.
      4. While the lamb is roasting, make the conﬁt: In a small roasting
pan, combine the onion, tomatoes, ginger, and olive oil and toss to mix.
Place in the oven and roast until the tomatoes are shrunken and wrinkled
and the onions are slightly caramelized, about 45 minutes. Transfer to a
small bowl, add the lemon juice, brown sugar, and salt and pepper and stir
gently to mix well. Set aside.
      5. When the roast is done to your liking, transfer it to a platter, cover
it loosely with foil, and let it rest for 20 minutes.
      6. Meanwhile, make the sauce: Pour off any excess fat from the
roasting pan and place the pan on the stove over two burners at medium-
high heat. Add the stock, wine, and vinegar, stirring to dissolve the brown
crusty stuff stuck to the bottom of the pan. Bring to a simmer and let sim­
mer until the liquid is reduced by half, about 15 minutes. Strain the sauce,
add the rosemary, and season with salt and white pepper.
      7. Cut the lamb into thick slices, drizzle it with some of the jus, and
serve, accompanied by the conﬁt and the remaining jus.



                                                            LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING   267
                               RECIPES FOR
                               LARGE TOUGH CUTS OF LAMB

10 STEPS TO GREAT BRAISED      North African–Style Braised Lamb Shanks with Lemons,
LAMB
                               Tomatoes, and Green Olives
 1. Dry the meat.
                               Chianti-and-Balsamic-Braised Lamb Shanks over Creamy
 2. Season the meat well.
                               Parmesan Polenta with Roasted Tomato–Garlic Relish
 3. Sear the meat hard.
                               Barbecued Lamb Shoulder, Kentucky-Style, with Chile-Vinegar
 4. Remove the meat from
                               Sauce and Sweet-and-Sour Slaw
    the pot, adjust the
    amount of fat in the
    pot, and sauté the         Mango-Braised Lamb Shoulder with Sweet Toasted Spices and
    aromatics and              Tomato-Cucumber Relish
    vegetables.

 5. Deglaze the pot with
    some of the liquid.

 6. Return the meat to the
    pot along with enough
    liquid to cover it about
    halfway.

 7. Bring to a simmer, skim
    the ﬁlm, cover the pot,
    and place in a 300°F
    oven.

 8. Check for doneness
    early and often: Look
    for “fork-tender.”

 9. Skim the fat and any
    ﬁlm from the liquid and,
    if you want, remove the
    meat and reduce the
    liquid; season to taste.

10. Carve the meat and
    serve with the braising
    liquid on the side.




268
North African–Style Braised                                                           THE CUT

                                                                                     See Chianti-and-Balsamic-

Lamb Shanks with Lemons,                                                             Braised Lamb Shanks
                                                                                     (page 270) for details on

Tomatoes, and Green Olives                                                           lamb shanks.



      S E RVE S 6



Lemons, tomatoes, and green olives are typical ﬂavors of North African cook­
ing, and together they give this dish a bold, tangy ﬂavor. We particularly like
the strong jolt the dish gets from the whole lemon segments.
      To segment the lemons, peel them with a sharp knife, removing the
white pith entirely, then cut between the membranes and remove each sec­
tion whole, being careful to take out all the seeds.
      You might serve this over couscous and accompany it with a salad of
oranges and red onions or a green salad with feta cheese. Or try it with
Horseradish Mashed Potatoes (page 413).

      6 lamb shanks, about 1 pound each, well trimmed
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      2 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
      2 onions, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced
      2 tablespoons minced garlic
      2 stalks celery, diced small
      About 2 cups dry white wine
      2 cups lamb or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      6 large sprigs fresh thyme, plus 2 tablespoons fresh thyme leaves (or
          1 tablespoon dried thyme)
      1 bay leaf
      2 whole cloves
      3 lemons, peeled and cut into segments (see headnote above)
      2 large tomatoes, cored and diced large
      3 ⁄4   cup green olives in brine, rinsed, pitted, and halved
      1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley


      1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

      2. Dry the shanks with paper towels and sprinkle them generously
with salt and pepper. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof
pot with a lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not
smoking. Add the shanks in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid
crowding, and brown well on all sides, about 15 minutes total cooking
time. Transfer the shanks to a platter as they are done.


                                                               LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING           269
                                       3. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
                                 of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions and cook, stirring occa­
                                 sionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic and celery and
                                 cook, stirring occasionally, for 5 minutes. Add the wine and stock and
                                 bring to a simmer, scraping to dissolve any browned bits on the bottom of
                                 the pan.
                                      4. Add the shanks, along with the thyme sprigs, bay leaf, and cloves.
                                 (The liquid should come about halfway up the shanks; if it does not, add
                                 more wine or water.) Season with salt and pepper, bring to a simmer, and
                                 skim any ﬁlm from the surface. Cover, place in the oven, and cook until the
                                 meat is tender, 2 to 21⁄ 2 hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight
                                 down into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides right out,
                                 the meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
                                      5. When the shanks are done, transfer them to a platter and cover
                                 them loosely with foil to keep warm. Skim the fat from the braising liquid
                                 and reduce it until it has thickened slightly, then season with salt and pep­
                                 per and strain into a clean pot. Add the cooked shanks, the lemon seg­
                                 ments, tomatoes, and green olives and cook, stirring frequently, for 5
                                 minutes. Remove from the heat, stir in the thyme leaves and parsley, sea­
                                 son with salt and pepper, and serve, preferably over couscous.




THE CUT

The shank is basically the
                                 Chianti-and-Balsamic-Braised
lower part of the leg of the
lamb. It is very tough, with     Lamb Shanks over Creamy
lots of connective tissue,
but it becomes very tender       Parmesan Polenta with Roasted
and creates an elegant,
silky liquid when braised.       Tomato–Garlic Relish
Foreshanks (known as
trotters) or hind shanks                 S E RVE S 6
both work perfectly well,
but we prefer the hind
                                 Over the past few years, lamb shanks have become popular in the restaurant
shanks. They are larger
and meatier, and because         world. The lamb equivalent of the highly fashionable osso buco, they are rela­
lamb is slaughtered so           tively inexpensive but have a tremendous amount of ﬂavor, and if cooked
young, they are not all that
                                 slowly in moist heat, they become very tender. They are also nearly impossi­
much tougher.
                                 ble to screw up, an advantage in any kitchen.
                                         This recipe demonstrates some of the reasons for the popularity of
                                 lamb shanks. The lamb is amazingly easy to make, and when it comes out of
                                 the oven after that long, slow cooking in ﬂavorful liquid, it tastes fantastic.



270            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      Creamy polenta makes a great base for these shanks, but if you don’t       OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

want to take the time to make it, you can simply serve the shanks and the ﬂa­   You can make this recipe
                                                                                with meaty beef short ribs
vorful braising liquid over egg noodles or Mashed Potatoes (page 413). By
                                                                                if you like.
the same token, you can make the polenta and skip the relish if you like. But
we recommend you go ahead and make all three components. It’s not really
that much work (the relish can be made several days ahead) and together
they make for a very impressive and full-ﬂavored Italian-style meal.
      We would serve this with a salad of tomatoes and arugula and Quick-
Sauteed Spinach with Garlic (page 427).


      6 lamb shanks, about 1 pound each, trimmed
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      3 tablespoons vegetable oil, or more if needed
      2 onions, peeled and thinly sliced
      2 carrots, peeled and diced medium
      2 stalks celery, diced medium
      2 tablespoons minced garlic
      4 sprigs fresh thyme (or 2 teaspoons dried thyme)
      2 whole cloves
      1 bay leaf
      About 2 cups Chianti or other dry red wine
      1 cup balsamic vinegar
      About 11 ⁄ 2 cups lamb or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)

      FOR THE RELISH
      1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
      6 plum tomatoes, cored, peeled, seeded, and cut into eighths
      1 head garlic, separated into individual cloves and peeled
      1⁄ 2   teaspoon ground allspice
      1 tablespoon dark brown sugar
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      Splash of red vermouth (optional)

      F O R T H E P O L E N TA

      2 tablespoons unsalted butter
      1 medium yellow onion, peeled and diced small
      31 ⁄ 2 cups milk
      31 ⁄ 2 cups chicken stock
      11 ⁄ 2 cups medium-grind yellow cornmeal
      1 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




                                                          LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING             271
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE                      1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.
If you have leftovers, strip
the meat off the shanks,                2. Dry the lamb shanks with paper towels and sprinkle them gener­
mix it together with the          ously with salt and pepper. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large
polenta and relish, put it all    ovenproof pot with a lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very
in a lightly oiled casserole
                                  hot but not smoking. Add the shanks in a single layer, in batches if neces­
dish, and bake it in a 350°F
oven until warm. Now,             sary to avoid crowding, and cook until well browned on all sides, 10 to 15
that’s one ﬁne little casse­      minutes total; transfer the shanks to a platter as they are done.
role.
                                       3. Pour off all but about 2 tablespoons of fat from the pot. Add the
                                  onions and cook, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.
                                  Add the carrots and celery and cook, stirring occasionally, for 5 minutes.
                                  Add the garlic, thyme, cloves, and bay leaf and cook, stirring, for 1 minute
                                  more.
                                        4. Return the lamb to the pot and pour in the wine, vinegar, and
                                  stock. (The liquid should come about halfway up the sides of the shanks; if
                                  it does not, add more wine or stock.) Bring to a simmer, stirring to incor­
                                  porate any brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pot, and skim any ﬁlm
                                  from the surface. Cover, place in the oven, and cook until the lamb is very
                                  tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down
                                  into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides right out, the
                                  meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
                                          5. While the shanks are braising, make the relish: Combine all the
                                  ingredients in a shallow baking dish, cover with aluminum foil, and place
                                  in the oven beside the shanks. Cook until tender, stirring occasionally, 2 to
                                  21⁄ 2 hours.
                                        6. When the shanks are done, transfer them to a platter and cover
                                  with foil to keep warm. Skim the fat from the braising liquid, taste the liq­
                                  uid, and reduce it if necessary to give it more ﬂavor. For a thicker sauce,
                                  reduce it until it coats the back of a spoon. Strain the sauce into a clean
                                  pot, add the cooked shanks, cover, and keep warm.
                                        7. About 20 minutes before you think the lamb will be done, start
                                  making the polenta. In a medium sauté pan, melt the butter over medium
                                  heat. Add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until golden brown, 11
                                  to 13 minutes. Add the milk and chicken stock and bring to a boil, then
                                  slowly add the cornmeal in a steady stream, whisking constantly. Bring
                                  back to a simmer, whisking to break up any lumps, and cook, stirring fre­
                                  quently, until the polenta is thick and creamy but not so thick that a
                                  wooden spoon stands up by itself, 20 to 25 minutes. Stir in the cheese, sea­
                                  son with salt and pepper, and serve immediately, topped with the shanks
                                  and lots of sauce.



272             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Barbecued Lamb Shoulder                                                             THE CUT

                                                                                    What we are using here is

Kentucky-Style, with Chile-                                                         the boneless lamb shoul­
                                                                                    der roast, which is the

Vinegar Sauce and Sweet-and-                                                        square-cut shoulder roast
                                                                                    (see Mango-Braised Lamb
                                                                                    Shoulder, page 275) with
Sour Slaw                                                                           the bones removed. Using
                                                                                    the boneless version not
      S E RVE S 4 TO 5                                                              only makes it easier to
                                                                                    carve, but brings the roast
                                                                                    down to about the 5-pound
While this dish may surprise even a lot of die-hard barbecue fans, it is actually
                                                                                    range. Of course, the bone-
in the ﬁne old Kentucky tradition of barbecued mutton. Barbecuing is essen­         in version is also excellent
tially a smoke braise, in which the meat is cooked through long exposure to         here. If you like, you could
                                                                                    also use what is called the
indirect heat and smoke. It works perfectly for relatively tough cuts of meat
                                                                                    shoulder cushion roast;
such as shoulder. In fact, you can feel free to use some of the tougher (and        this is another boneless
even cheaper) lamb shoulder cuts, like the blade roast, in this treatment. After    version of the same roast,
                                                                                    but instead of being rolled
all, if a few hours in the barbecue pit can make mutton tender, a slightly gnarly
                                                                                    up, it is laid out ﬂat.
lamb shoulder should present no problems whatsoever.
      The deep, rich, smoky ﬂavor of this lamb goes great with Grilled Corn         OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
on the Cob (page 433) and sweet potato salad.                                       A lamb shoulder eye roast,
                                                                                    sometimes called a Sara­
      1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt                                                        toga roast, is also ﬁne for
      1 ⁄4   cup paprika                                                            this treatment, as is a lamb
                                                                                    shoulder blade roast. You
      2 tablespoons ground cumin
                                                                                    could even use a leg of
      2 tablespoons ground coriander                                                lamb, but in that case,
      2 tablespoons cayenne pepper                                                  leave at least 1 ⁄4 inch of fat
                                                                                    on the exterior so that it
      1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
                                                                                    stays moist as it cooks.
      1 ⁄4   cup packed dark brown sugar
      One 5-pound boneless lamb shoulder roast

      F OR TH E S LAW

      3 cups shredded green cabbage
      1 carrot, peeled and grated
      1 ⁄4   cup dried apricots, diced small
      1 ⁄4   cup granulated sugar
      1⁄ 2   cup cider vinegar
      2 tablespoons celery seeds
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      F OR TH E SAU CE

      1 cup white vinegar
      2 tablespoons Tabasco sauce
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




                                                        LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                       273
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE                1. Light a ﬁre well over to one side of a large kettle grill, using
Like shredded pork barbe­       enough coals to ﬁll half a shoe box.
cue, lamb barbecue keeps
a long time and freezes               2. In a small bowl, combine the salt, paprika, cumin, coriander,
well. Or you can substitute     cayenne, cinnamon, and brown sugar. Rub the lamb all over with this mix­
leftover barbecued lamb
                                ture, pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
for the ground lamb in New
School Shepherd’s Pie
                                      3. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are covered in white
(page 311).
                                ash, place the meat on the side of the grill away from the coals, being care­
                                ful that none of the meat is directly over the coals. Put the lid on the grill
                                with the vents open one quarter of the way. Cook, adding a handful of
                                fresh charcoal about every 30 minutes, until the meat is super-tender, 3 to
                                4 hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down into the meat
                                and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if
                                the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
                                      4. While the lamb is cooking, make the slaw: In a medium bowl,
                                combine the cabbage, carrot, and dried apricots and toss well. In a small
                                bowl, combine the granulated sugar, vinegar, and celery seeds and mix
                                very well. Pour the dressing over the cabbage, toss to combine, and season
                                with salt and pepper. Cover and refrigerate.
                                     5. Make the sauce: In a small bowl, whisk together the vinegar,
                                Tabasco sauce, and salt and pepper.
                                     6. When the lamb is done, remove it from the grill and chop or shred
                                the meat. Mix with the vinegar-Tabasco sauce to taste and serve, accom­
                                panied by the slaw.




274           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Mango-Braised Lamb                                                                THE CUT

                                                                                  Shoulder is the lamb

Shoulder with Sweet Toasted                                                       equivalent of beef chuck.
                                                                                  Like chuck, it comes from a

Spices and Tomato-Cucumber                                                        part of the animal that
                                                                                  does a lot of work, so it has
                                                                                  plenty of connective tissue.
Relish                                                                            It also has quite a few
                                                                                  bones and a fair amount of
      S E RVE S 4 TO 6                                                            fat. But it has excellent ﬂa­
                                                                                  vor and when cooked prop­
                                                                                  erly, which is to say long
One of the great things about braising is that because of the long cooking
                                                                                  and low with some liquid, it
time and the strong character of the cuts of meat that are best for braising,     becomes quite tender. As
you can add plenty of intense ﬂavors and still not overpower the dish.            an added selling point, it is
                                                                                  usually quite cheap.
      Here we take advantage of that dynamic to make an Indian-inspired
                                                                                     Our ﬁrst choice for this
dish from a large shoulder lamb roast. Slow-cooking the lamb in mango             recipe is the bone-in lamb
juice, wine, and vinegar along with some sautéed garlic, ginger, and chile        square-cut shoulder roast,
                                                                                  often simply referred to as a
peppers gives both lamb and liquid a range of deep, compelling ﬂavors.
                                                                                  lamb shoulder roast. This is
We then ﬁnish the dish by toasting a mixture of sweet spices, grinding            basically the whole shoul­
them up together, and passing them around for people to sprinkle on their         der and upper arm, so it is
                                                                                  often as large as 8 pounds.
meat like high-powered salt and pepper. It’s similar to the way Indian
                                                                                  If you can’t ﬁnd one in the
cooks add the spice mix known as garam masala to dishes at the end of             5- to 6-pound neighbor­
cooking. For a little coolant, we also add a simple but tasty tomato-cucum­       hood, go ahead and buy the
                                                                                  larger one, then ask your
ber relish.
                                                                                  butcher to slice off a few
      We would serve this with basmati or plain long-grain rice, some chap­       arm chops; you can toss
atis or other ﬂatbread, and a simple green salad.                                 them in the freezer for
                                                                                  another day.
      One 5- to 6-pound lamb square-cut shoulder roast, trimmed of most              Those of you who don’t
        external fat                                                              like carving around a vari­
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                       ety of bones might opt for
                                                                                  the boneless shoulder
      2 tablespoons olive oil
                                                                                  roast, which is the same cut
      1 onion, peeled and diced small                                             with the bones removed.
      1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced small                           It’s a little bit less ﬂavorful,
                                                                                  but it’s certainly less work.
      1 green bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced small
                                                                                  The choice is yours.
      2 tablespoons minced garlic
      2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger                                           OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

      1 to 2 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice, or to taste   Lamb shoulder roasts can
                                                                                  be hard to locate, so really
      2 cups mango juice (or substitute orange juice)
                                                                                  you should feel free to use
      1⁄ 2   cup balsamic vinegar                                                 any roast from the shoul­
      About 1 cup dry red wine                                                    der in this recipe. The out­
      5 cardamom pods                                                             side shoulder roast and
                                                                                  shoulder blade roast are
      1 star anise                                                                good choices, as is a
                                                                                  shoulder arm roast.




                                                          LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                   275
                                2 tablespoons coriander seeds
                                1 tablespoon cumin seeds
                                1⁄ 2   cinnamom stick
                                2 tablespoons white peppercorns

                                FOR THE RELISH

                                4 plum tomatoes, cored and diced small
                                1 cucumber, peeled, seeded, and diced small
                                1⁄ 3   cup fresh lemon juice (about 11 ⁄ 2 lemons)
                                2 tablespoons yellow mustard seeds
                                1 tablespoon fennel seeds
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

                              2. Dry the lamb with paper towels and rub it generously all over with
                        salt and pepper. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot
                        with a lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smok­
                        ing. Add the lamb and brown well on all sides, about 15 minutes total.
                        Transfer the meat to a platter.
                               3. Pour off all but about 2 tablespoons of fat from the pot. Add the
                        onion and peppers and cook, stirring occasionally, until the onion is golden
                        brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic, ginger, and chiles and cook, stir­
                        ring, for 2 minutes more. Add the mango juice and vinegar and bring to a
                        simmer, scraping up any browned bits from the bottom of the pot.
                              4. Return the meat to the pot and add the wine. (The liquid should
                        come about halfway up the side of the lamb; if it does not, add water or
                        more wine.) Bring to a simmer again and skim any scum from the surface.
                        Cover, place in the oven, and cook until the meat is very tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2
                        hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down into the meat
                        and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if
                        the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
                               5. While the meat is cooking, place the cardamom, anise, coriander,
                        cumin, cinnamon, and white peppercorns in a small heavy sauté pan and
                        toast over medium heat, shaking the pan frequently to prevent scorching,
                        until they darken and become fragrant, 2 to 3 minutes. Grind together in a
                        spice mill or coffee grinder and set aside.
                             6. Make the relish: In a medium bowl, combine the tomatoes,
                        cucumber, lemon juice, mustard seeds, fennel seeds, and salt and pepper
                        and mix well.




276   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
       7. When the meat is done, remove it from the pot and cover it loosely     COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

with foil to keep warm. Skim the fat from the braising liquid. Taste the liq­    As with other braised
                                                                                 meats, leftover lamb from
uid, and if it needs more ﬂavor, place the pot on the stove over medium-
                                                                                 this dish is great cut into
high heat and simmer to reduce the liquid. For a thicker sauce, reduce it        cubes, mixed with rice and
until it coats the back of a spoon. Season with salt and pepper.                 enough of the braising
                                                                                 liquid to moisten, and then
      8. Cut the meat into thick slices, drizzle with the braising liquid, and   heated up like a casserole.
serve, passing the relish and toasted spices separately.                         If you have any leftover
                                                                                 relish, serve it alongside.
                                                                                 If not, try some mango
                                                                                 pickles.




                                                      LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                  277
                                RECIPES FOR
                                SMALL TENDER CUTS OF LAMB

10 STEPS TO GREAT GRILLED       Grilled Peppered Lamb Loin Chops with Green Grape–
LAMB
                                Parsley Relish
 1. Build a two-level ﬁre
    using hardwood              Grilled Double-Thick Lamb Loin Chops with Roasted
    charcoal.
                                Peppers and Onions and Creamy Braised Garlic-Parmesan
 2. Wait for the ﬂames to       Vinaigrette
    die down and the coals
    to be covered with          Broiled Double-Thick Lamb Rib Chops with Slicked-Up Store-
    gray ash.
                                bought Mint Jelly Sauce
 3. Check the temperature
    of the ﬁre.                 Grilled Lamb Tenderloins on Greek Salad with
                                Grilled Pita
 4. Dry the meat well.

 5. Season the meat well.       Grilled Lamb Shoulder Chops Greek-Style

 6. Sear the meat hard
                                Parsley-Coated Grilled Lamb Loin with Smoky Eggplant
    over a hot ﬁre.
                                Planks and Tomato-Fig Hobo Pack
 7. Move the meat to the
    cooler part of the ﬁre if   Sautéed Lamb Medallions with Red Wine–Pomegranate Sauce
    it needs to cook more
                                and Minted Vegetables
    slowly (don’t use the
    cover).
                                Indobob: Spice-Rubbed Grilled Lamb Skewers with Peanut-
 8. Flip the meat only once     Herb Power Pack
    during cooking.

 9. Check for doneness          Grilled Lamb and Peach Skewers with Cumin-Raisin
    early and often (nick,      Vinaigrette
    peek, and cheat).
                                Broiled Sherried Lamb Skewers with Dried Apricots and
10. Remove the meat from
    the ﬁre, cover with foil,   Green Olive Dressing
    allow to rest, then
    serve it up.




278
Grilled Lamb Leg Steaks on Eggplant Planks with Mint-Yogurt    10 STEPS TO GREAT SAUTÉED
                                                               LAMB
                     Sauce and Cucumber–Red Onion Relish
                                                                1. Use a big heavy
             Denver Lamb Ribs Adobo with Fresh Pineapple-          sauté pan.

                                              Chipotle Glaze    2. Dry the meat well.

  Stir-fried Lamb with Green Beans, Eggplant, and Peppers in    3. Season the meat well.

                                        Hoisin-Ginger Sauce     4. Use only a small
                                                                   amount of oil.

                                                                5. Get the pan and the
                                                                   oil hot.

                                                                6. Don’t overcrowd the
                                                                   meat in the pan.

                                                                7. Sear the meat hard.

                                                                8. Flip the meat only once
                                                                   while cooking.

                                                                9. Check for doneness
                                                                   early and often (nick,
                                                                   peek, and cheat).

                                                               10. Remove the meat from
                                                                   the heat, cover with
                                                                   foil, and allow to rest,
                                                                   then serve.

                                                               10 STEPS TO GREAT BROILED
                                                               LAMB
                                                                  Check out sautéing:
                                                                  The steps are the
                                                                  same except you use a
                                                                  broiler pan instead of a
                                                                  sauté pan, preheat the
                                                                  broiler instead of
                                                                  getting the oil hot, and
                                                                  skip the searing step.




                                                                                         279
THE CUT

As their name states, lamb
                                 Grilled Peppered Lamb Loin
loin chops come from the
loin, which is a very tender
                                 Chops with Green Grape–Parsley
part of the animal. They are
like little baby T-bones,        Relish
each one containing a
small piece of the ultra-                S E RVE S 4

tender tenderloin muscle
and a larger piece of the        You have to be careful when cooking lamb chops over live ﬁre because they
top loin muscle, divided by
a T-shaped bone. They are
                                 contain a fair amount of fat that can drip into the ﬁre and cause ﬂare-ups.
the most expensive type of       (When you are cooking loin chops, which sometimes have little tails, you also
lamb chops, which means          have to watch that these thin tails don’t burn.) So make sure you leave a por­
they cost a pretty penny
indeed. But they are worth
                                 tion of the grill with no coals so you can move the chops there to let any ﬂare-
it for many cooks, because       ups die down.
they are extremely tender                If you have cooked from our other books, you may well have seen this
and have a delicate lamb
ﬂavor that is appreciated
                                 relish before, because it’s one of our bedrock favorites. It’s a little unusual,
even by people who are           but the sweetness of the grapes perfectly balances out the strong vinegar
not always that fond of          and garlic ﬂavors, and it’s a breeze to make. It will keep, covered and refriger­
lamb.
                                 ated, for 3 to 4 days.

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                         Serve this with grilled pita bread, Green Beans with Mushrooms and
Top loin chops, which do         Almonds (page 429), and a spinach or cucumber and tomato salad.
not have the tenderloin
                                         FOR THE RELISH
portion, are also excellent
in this recipe. Shoulder                 1 cup seedless green grapes, halved
chops and leg chops are                  1 ⁄4   cup red wine vinegar
ﬁne too, but they should be              1 ⁄4   cup virgin olive oil
cooked over a hot rather
than medium-hot ﬁre, for a               1 teaspoon minced garlic
minute or so less per side.              1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                         Eight 6-ounce lamb loin chops, 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick
                                         1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt
                                         1⁄ 3   cup freshly cracked black pepper
                                         2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                         2 tablespoons olive oil


                                      1. Light a ﬁre in your grill, making sure to leave part of the grill free
                                 of coals.
                                       2. Make the relish: In a small bowl, combine the grapes, vinegar,
                                 olive oil, garlic, parsley, and salt and pepper. Mix well and set aside.




280            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
       3. Dry the lamb chops with paper towels and rub them on all sides
with the salt, pepper, minced garlic, and olive oil. When the ﬁre has died
down and the coals are medium-hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches
above the grill surface for about 3 seconds), place the chops on the grill
and cook until they are well seared on both sides and done to your liking
on the interior, 4 to 5 minutes per side for rare. (If there are ﬂare-ups,
move the offending chop brieﬂy to the part of the grill with no coals.) To
check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thick­
est part of the meat; it should be slightly less done than you like it. When
they are done, remove the chops from the grill, cover them loosely with
foil, and allow them to rest for 5 minutes.
     4. Serve the chops accompanied by the relish.




                                                     LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING   281
THE CUT

See Grilled Peppered Lamb
                                Grilled Double-Thick Lamb Loin
Loin Chops (page 280) for
details on loin chops. Here
                                Chops with Roasted Peppers and
we are using double chops,
which means they are even       Onions and Creamy Braised
more expensive, but they
do make a very impressive       Garlic-Parmesan Vinaigrette
presentation.
                                        S E RVE S 4

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Top loin chops, which do        Double-thick loin chops are about the most luxurious chop you can ﬁnd.
not have the tenderloin         Super-tender and with a delicate but pronounced lamb ﬂavor, they are a real
portion, are a ﬁne substi­
tute here, but be sure to
                                delicacy. They are also huge by lamb chop standards, so this is a “sear and
get double-thick versions.      move” situation, in which we brown the chops over a hot ﬁre, then move them
If you can’t get them, then     to a cooler ﬁre to ﬁnish cooking.
use the standard thickness
and follow the directions
                                        To save time, you can braise the garlic several days ahead of time,
on page 278 for cooking         squeeze the garlic meat out of the cloves, put it in a bowl, cover it with a ﬁlm
them. Shoulder chops and        of olive oil, and keep it in the refrigerator.
leg chops are also good,
but they should be cooked
                                        Serve these with Quick-Sautéed Broccoli Rabe with Garlic and Oil
over a hot rather than          (page 430) and either risotto or a side dish of pasta.
medium-hot ﬁre, for a
minute or so less per side.             FOR THE VINAIGRETTE

                                        1 head garlic
                                        3 tablespoons olive oil
                                        1 tablespoon grainy mustard
                                        2 tablespoons freshly grated Parmesan cheese
                                        3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
                                        2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
                                        1⁄ 2   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                        Eight 8-ounce double lamb loin chops, at least 2 inches thick
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        2 red or yellow bell peppers, cored, seeded, and halved
                                        2 medium red onions, peeled and cut into 1 ⁄ 2-inch-thick slices
                                        3 tablespoons olive oil
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped pitted black olives
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh oregano


                                      1. To make the vinaigrette, ﬁrst braise the garlic: Preheat the oven to
                                400°F. Slice off the top 1⁄4 inch of the unpeeled head of garlic and place the
                                garlic in the center of a foot-long sheet of foil. Pour the 3 tablespoons oil



282           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
over the bulb, wrap it up tightly, and roast until the individual garlic cloves
are soft to the touch, about 1 hour.
      2. Remove the garlic from the oven and, as soon as it’s cool enough
to handle, break the individual cloves from the head and squeeze the meat
out of each one into a small bowl. Add the mustard and cheese and mix
well. In a separate bowl, combine the lemon juice and vinegar and add the
extra virgin olive oil in a steady stream, whisking steadily. Add the garlic
mixture, whisk together well, and season with salt and pepper. Cover and
set aside.
      3. Build a two-level ﬁre in your grill, putting about three quarters of
the coals on one side and about one quarter on the other side.
      4. Sprinkle the chops generously with salt and pepper. When the ﬁre
has died down and the coals are hot on the side with more coals (you can
hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds), place
the chops on the grill and sear well, about 6 minutes per side. Move to the
cooler side of the grill and cook, turning once, for 4 to 6 minutes more for
rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in
the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less done than you like
it. When the chops are done to your liking, remove them from the grill,
cover them loosely with foil, and let them rest for 5 minutes.
      5. While the lamb is searing, coat the peppers and onions with the
olive oil, being careful not to separate the onion slices into rings. (If it
makes it easier, stick a toothpick or small wooden skewer horizontally
through each slice to keep the rings together.) When you move the lamb
to the cooler side of the grill, lay the peppers and onions on the grill right
beside them and cook, turning once, until tender and nicely browned, 4 to
6 minutes.
     6. In a medium bowl, separate the onions into rings. Thinly slice the
peppers and add to the onions, along with the olives and oregano. Toss
with about 1⁄4 cup of the vinaigrette.
      7. Serve the roasted vegetables with the chops, passing the remaining
dressing on the side.




                                                       LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING   283
THE CUT

Here we are calling for
                                  Broiled Double-Thick Lamb Rib
chops from the rib area of
the lamb, the lamb equiva­
                                  Chops with Slicked-Up
lent of the Delmonico
steak. Since these chops          Store-bought Mint Jelly Sauce
are relatively thin, we are
using double-thick ones                   S E RVE S 4

here, each containing two
rib bones. Although not as        Lamb and mint are a very traditional English combination. But the straight
expensive as loin chops,
they are still going to set
                                  mint jelly that is often served with lamb is a little too sweet for our taste. Add
you back a bit, but they are      some fresh lemon juice for tartness, a bit of cardamom for a touch of exotic
really excellent little chops.    aromaticity, and some butter to smooth the whole thing out, and you’ve got
A slightly less costly
approach is to buy whole
                                  the makings of a great but very quick and simple pan sauce.
racks and cut them into                   This recipe is also great on the grill. But since a hot ﬁre, which is what
2-bone chops.                     you should use, is a bit hotter than the broiler even set on high, cook the
                                  chops for about 1 minute less per side.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                          Serve these chops with Persian Rice (page 418) and a salad of toma­
If you don’t mind the
expense, double loin chops        toes, scallions, black olives, and cilantro, tossed with a lemon vinaigrette.
are an excellent substitute
                                          F OR TH E SAU CE
in this recipe.
                                          One 8-ounce jar mint jelly
                                          1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
                                          Seeds from 4 cardamom pods (or 1 ⁄4 teaspoon ground cardamom)
                                          2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, cut into pieces
                                          1 ⁄4   cup fresh mint leaves, cut into very thin strips


                                          8-ounce double lamb rib chops, 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick
                                          3 large cloves garlic, peeled and halved lengthwise
                                          2 tablespoons olive oil
                                          Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                          1. Preheat the broiler, set on high if        you have a choice.
                                         2. Make the sauce: In a medium sauté pan, warm the jelly over low heat
                                  until it liqueﬁes. Stir in the lemon juice and cardamom, then raise the heat,
                                  bring to a simmer, and simmer until the sauce is reduced by half, about 10
                                  minutes. Remove from the heat and add the cold butter a little at a time,
                                  swirling the pan to blend it into the sauce. Stir in the mint leaves and set aside.
                                        3. As soon as the sauce is done, cook the chops: Dry the chops with
                                  paper towels, rub them with the cut sides of the garlic cloves, brush with
                                  olive oil, and season with salt and pepper. Place them on the rack of the
                                  broiler pan about 3 inches from the heat source and cook until well seared on
                                  the outside and done to your liking on the inside, 5 to 6 minutes per side for


284             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
medium-rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch
cut in the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less done than you
like it. Remove the chops from the broiler and allow to rest for 5 minutes.
      4. Serve the chops accompanied by the sauce.




Grilled Lamb Tenderloins on                                                        THE CUT

                                                                                  A lamb tenderloin is a

Greek Salad with Grilled Pita                                                     small piece of meat, only
                                                                                  about 6 ounces, almost like
                                                                                  a big fat pencil. It can be
      S E RVE S 4 TO 6                                                            hard to get hold of, since
                                                                                  most butchers cut the loin
Lamb and the other ﬂavors of Greek cooking are pretty much inseparable.           into loin chops rather than
                                                                                  boning out the tenderloin
Here we rub a batch of lamb tenderloins with a straightforward but very ﬂa­       separately. But, like tender­
vorful and aromatic spice rub, grill them, then slice them and serve them on a    loin of pork or beef, it is
classic Greek-style salad along with some simple grilled pita. You won’t ﬁnd      super-tender and great on
                                                                                  the grill, so it is worth ask­
a better simple lamb dish than this.                                              ing the butcher for, even
      Serve this with some Hash Browns (page 412) for a light summer meal.        though you will probably
                                                                                  have to give him a little
                                                                                  lead time.
      FOR THE SPICE RUB

      3 tablespoons cumin seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons ground cumin)
                                                                                   OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
      3 tablespoons coriander seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons ground coriander)
                                                                                  You can easily substitute
      2 tablespoons black peppercorns (or 1 tablespoon freshly cracked black      rib or loin lamb chops in
         pepper)                                                                  this recipe. Simply grill
      3 tablespoons kosher salt                                                   them for about 2 minutes
                                                                                  more per side than the ten­
                                                                                  derloin, then slice the meat
      8 lamb tenderloins, about 6 ounces each, trimmed
                                                                                  up and put the slices on
                                                                                  the salad.
      F O R T H E G R I L L E D P I TA

      6 fresh pita breads, cut into eighths
      3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
      3 tablespoons kosher salt

      FOR THE SALAD

      11 ⁄ 2 large cucumbers, peeled, seeded, and sliced 1 ⁄4 inch thick
      2 tomatoes, cored and diced large
      1 small red onion, peeled and sliced paper-thin
      1⁄ 2   cup feta cheese broken into small cubes
      3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
      1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
      2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh oregano
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste



                                                            LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING               285
                                1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

                              2. If using whole spices, combine the cumin, coriander, and pepper­
                        corns in a small heavy sauté pan and toast over medium heat, shaking the
                        pan frequently to prevent scorching, until the spices become fragrant and
                        darken, 2 to 3 minutes. Cool and grind in a spice grinder, coffee grinder, or
                        mortar and pestle along with the salt. If using preground spices, combine
                        them and the salt in a small bowl and mix well.
                              3. Dry the lamb with paper towels and rub it all over with the spice
                        mixture, pressing gently to be sure it adheres. When the ﬁre has died down
                        and the coals are hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill sur­
                        face for 1 to 2 seconds), place the lamb on the grill and cook until well
                        seared on the outside and done to your liking on the inside, about 3 min­
                        utes per side for medium-rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and
                        cheat: Cut into the meat and check to see if the center is slightly less done
                        than you like it. When the tenderloins are done to your liking, remove
                        them from the grill, cover them loosely with foil, and let them rest for
                        about 5 minutes.
                               4. While the lamb is grilling, brush the pita triangles with the olive
                        oil, sprinkle with the salt, and place around the edges of the ﬁre, where the
                        heat is lower. Grill on both sides until the edges darken and curl slightly, 2
                        to 3 minutes per side.
                              5. While the grilled lamb is resting, make the salad: In a medium
                        bowl, combine the cucumbers, tomatoes, onion, and feta. In a small bowl,
                        combine the lemon juice, olive oil, oregano, and salt and pepper and whisk
                        well to combine. Pour the dressing over the cucumber mixture, toss gently,
                        and spread on a large serving platter.
                              6. Slice the lamb into thick slices on the bias, arrange the slices on top
                        of the salad, and serve with the pitas.




286   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Grilled Lamb Shoulder Chops                                                           THE CUT

                                                                                      The lamb shoulder blade

Greek-Style                                                                           chop comes from the top of
                                                                                      the lamb shoulder, near the
                                                                                      neck. It is roughly rectangu­
      S E RVE S 4                                                                     lar in shape and typically
                                                                                      has lines of fat running
Shoulder chops are actually our favorite type of lamb chop. They aren’t the           through it. It also has
                                                                                      pieces of two bones, the
most tender, and they certainly have a little gnarl and fat in them, but they
                                                                                      chine bone (backbone) and
have truly great lamb ﬂavor, and we like all the little pieces of different mus­      the blade bone. Like other
cles in them. Plus, they are far less expensive than other types of lamb chops        cuts from the shoulder, it
                                                                                      has a deep, rich lamb ﬂavor.
and, after all, they are right next to the ﬁrst rib chop. They are usually rather
                                                                                      It is best suited for either
thin, so make sure you have a hot ﬁre so they get some good sear on the out­          braising, which makes it
side before they have a chance to overcook on the inside.                             very tender, or high-heat
                                                                                      grilling, which melts the
      Lamb and grilling are a classic combination in Greek cookery. So we
                                                                                      interior fat and crisps up
like to grill up some shoulder lamb chops over a hot ﬁre, then serve them very        the fat on the edges of the
simply with that quintessential Greek ﬂavoring combination of fresh oregano,          chop. While it can certainly
                                                                                      be chewy, it is not tough
fresh lemon juice, really good olive oil, and just a touch of garlic.
                                                                                      when cooked by these
      Serve these chops with grilled pita bread, tabbouleh, or Parsleyed New          methods.
Potatoes (page 412), and some hard-cooked eggs.
                                                                                      OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

      Four 10- to 12-ounce lamb shoulder blade chops, 1 ⁄ 2 inch to 1 ⁄4 inch thick   The shoulder arm chop,
                                                                                      also known as the round
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                                                                      bone chop, is an excellent
      1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil                                               substitute in this recipe. It
      2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh oregano                                     comes from the bottom of
      1 teaspoon minced garlic                                                        the lamb shoulder, near the
      1⁄ 2
                                                                                      leg, contains a round cross-
             lemon
                                                                                      section of the arm bone,
                                                                                      and has slightly less fat
      1. Build a ﬁre in your grill.                                                   than the shoulder blade
                                                                                      chop. You can also use
      2. Dry the chops with paper towels and sprinkle them generously                 lamb loin or rib chops in
with salt and pepper. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are hot                this recipe.

(you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds),
                                                                                      BUTCHERSPEAK
place the chops on the grill and cook until well seared, 3 to 4 minutes per           If you buy shoulder chops in
side. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in            the supermarket, they are
the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less done than you like          most likely going to be
it. When the chops are done, remove them from the grill, cover them                   blade chops. If you go to a
                                                                                      butcher, ask him for the arm
loosely with foil, and let them rest for 5 minutes.                                   chops, which are a bit less
                                                                                      fatty but just as ﬂavorful.
      3. Meanwhile, in a small bowl, combine the olive oil, oregano, and
garlic and mix well.                                                                  COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

                                                                                      Leftover lamb from these
     4. Spoon the garlic mixture over the lamb chops, squeeze the lemon
                                                                                      chops makes a fantastic
on top of them, and serve hot.                                                        addition to a cold orzo salad.




                                                           LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                    287
THE CUT

Just as with other animals,
                                 Parsley-Coated Grilled Lamb Loin
the loin is a very tender
part of the lamb. It is usu­
                                 with Smoky Eggplant Planks and
ally cut into loin chops, but
if you talk nice to your         Tomato-Fig Hobo Pack
butcher, he will bone out
the loin and make the cut                S E RVE S 4
we are calling for here, a
boneless whole loin of
                                 The loin is the primo, pure expression of lamb meat—no bone, virtually no con­
lamb. It is going to be very
expensive, but you aren’t        nective tissue or fat, just lamb. You see it quite often in restaurants, but
going to ﬁnd a cut of meat       almost never in a supermarket. It is even rare in butcher shops, but if you
that is much more elegant,
                                 make a point of calling in advance, you can get it. It is nice to serve at home
tender, and delicately ﬂa­
vored than this one.             because it’s unusual, it’s very easy to cook, and its tenderness is quite
                                 amazing.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                   As cooks all over the Middle East can attest, eggplant is great with
Lamb loin or rib chops are       lamb. Here we cut it lengthwise into planks, an approach that lets you grill it
ﬁne substitutes in this
                                 without any further preparation and also creates nice platforms for serving
recipe. See pages 282 and
284 for general cooking          the lamb. The hobo pack of tomatoes and ﬁgs creates its own juice, which
times for these chops.           ﬂows down over the lamb and eggplant when you serve it and gives the
                                 whole dish a nice rich ﬂavor.
                                         Serve this with your favorite rice dish—risotto, Simple Rice Pilaf (page
                                 417) or Persian Rice (page 418), even Coconut Rice (page 418) and a
                                 mixed green salad.

                                         F O R T H E H O B O PA C K

                                         4 plum tomatoes, cored and halved
                                         6 ripe ﬁgs, quartered
                                         1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh mint

                                         3 tablespoons olive oil
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         1 whole boneless loin of lamb, about 2 pounds

                                         FOR THE EGGPLANT

                                         1 large eggplant, cut lengthwise into four 1-inch-thick slices
                                         3 tablespoons olive oil
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




288            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.                                               COOK ONCE, SERVE TWICE

                                                                                 In the unlikely event that
     2. Make the hobo pack: Tear off four sheets of heavy-duty foil, each        you have any lamb left
about 2 feet long, and stack them one on top of the other. Arrange the           over, slice it paper-thin and
tomatoes and ﬁgs in the center of the top sheet, drizzle with the olive oil,     serve it as a carpaccio­
                                                                                 style appetizer, drizzled
and season with salt and pepper. Fold up the sheets of foil around the ﬁgs
                                                                                 with good extra virgin olive
and tomatoes, one after another, turning the package a quarter turn              oil and sprinkled with
between each sheet and making sure that each sheet is well sealed.               capers. Now, that’s luxury.

      3. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium hot (you
can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds),
place the hobo pack on the outside periphery of the coals, where the ﬁre is
less intense. Pile the coals up around it and cook for about 20 minutes,
while you grill the lamb and eggplant.
      4. In a small bowl, combine the olive oil, parsley, garlic, and salt and
pepper and mix well. Dry the tenderloins with paper towels and slather
them generously with the garlic mixture, then place them on the grill and
cook until they are well seared on the outside and done to your liking on
the inside, 4 to 5 minutes per side for medium-rare. To check for doneness,
nick, peek, and cheat: Cut into the meat and check to see if the center is
slightly less done than you like it. When the chops are cooked to your lik­
ing, remove them from the grill, cover them loosely with foil, and let them
rest while you cook the eggplant.
      5. Brush the eggplant planks with the olive oil and season with salt
and pepper. Place on the grill and cook until golden brown on one side, 4
to 5 minutes. Flip them and grill on the other side the same way.
     6. Arrange the grilled planks on a serving platter, slice the lamb on
the bias, and arrange over the eggplant. Remove the tomatoes and ﬁgs
from the foil and toss with the mint. Spoon the tomatoes and ﬁgs over the
lamb and serve.




                                                      LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                    289
THE CUT

Basically what you need
                                 Sautéed Lamb Medallions with
here is several pieces cut
from the loin of the lamb.
                                 Red Wine–Pomegranate Sauce
The best approach is sim­
ply to ask your butcher to       and Minted Vegetables
cut these 3- to 4-ounce
pieces for you. You can                  S E RVE S 4

also ask him to pound
them to a 1 ⁄ 2-inch thickness   This is really a veal treatment applied to lamb, which is pretty cool. What you
while he’s at it, but that’s
very easy (and kind of fun)
                                 do is take slices of the ﬁne-grained lamb loin and pound them relatively thin,
to do at home.                   then quickly sauté them just long enough to give them a nice sear and cook
                                 them to medium-rare. It is a quick and simple approach, which features the
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           pure ﬂavor of the lamb. The subtle treatment of the vegetables matches the
Boneless lamb leg is a
                                 rather delicate taste of the lamb loin, and the red wine–pomegranate pan
good substitute in this
recipe.                          sauce adds depth and richness to the dish.
                                         By the way, pomegranate molasses is one of those ingredients, like
                                 chipotle peppers, that is really worth searching out. It has a complex, tart-
                                 sweet ﬂavor that can’t really be duplicated, and there’s no quicker way to add
                                 a touch of the exotic to all kinds of dishes than with a little of this dark red
                                 syrup. You can ﬁnd it in any Middle Eastern grocery or mail-order it on the Net.
                                         We would serve this with Rice Pilaf with Almonds and Currants (page
                                 417).

                                         10 pearl onions, peeled
                                         1 cup baby carrots
                                         1 cup fresh peas (or substitute thawed frozen peas)
                                         3 tablespoons olive oil
                                         Eight 3- to 4-ounce pieces lamb loin, pounded to a 1 ⁄ 2-inch thickness
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         1 red onion, peeled and diced small
                                         1 cup mellow red wine, such as merlot or zinfandel
                                         1 ⁄4   cup balsamic vinegar
                                         2 tablespoons pomegranate molasses (or substitute 1 tablespoon regular
                                            molasses mixed with 1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice)
                                         3 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                         1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh mint


                                        1. Blanch the vegetables: Fill a large pot or your sink with ice water.
                                 Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil over high heat. When the water
                                 is boiling, add the pearl onions and blanch for 2 minutes. Add the baby car­
                                 rots and blanch for another 3 minutes. Add the peas and blanch for 30 sec-




290            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
onds. Drain and immediately plunge the vegetables into the ice water to
stop the cooking process, then drain again and set aside.
      2. In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very
hot but not smoking. Sprinkle the lamb medallions generously with salt
and pepper. Add to the pan in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid
crowding, and sear well, 2 to 3 minutes per side. To check for doneness
nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut into the thickest part of a medal­
lion; it should be slightly less done than you like it. Transfer the lamb
medallions to a platter as they are done and cover with foil to keep warm.
      3. When all the meat is browned, pour off all but 2 tablespoons of
the fat from the pan and return it to medium-high heat. Add the red onion
and sauté, stirring occasionally, for about 1 minute. Add the wine and vine­
gar and bring to a boil, stirring to scrape up the browned bits on the bot­
tom of the pan. Continue to boil until the liquid is reduced by about two
thirds. Stir in the molasses, remove from the heat, and season with salt and
pepper.
      4. Meanwhile, in a medium sauté pan, melt the butter over medium-
high heat. Add the onions, carrots, and peas and sauté for 2 to 3 minutes,
until the vegetables are warmed through. Add the mint and season with
salt and pepper. Serve the vegetables with the lamb medallions.




Indobob: Spice-Rubbed Grilled
                                                                                  THE CUT

                                                                                  As with stew meat, you are
                                                                                  going to get better-quality
Lamb Skewers with Peanut-Herb                                                     lamb for skewers if you
                                                                                  buy a larger cut and cut it
Power Pack                                                                        into cubes yourself. In this
                                                                                  particular instance, we are
     S E RVE S 4                                                                  going to go with two differ­
                                                                                  ent options for the cut.
                                                                                  Most people will use leg,
The name of this dish comes from an English-speaking Malay cook who
                                                                                  which is the classic choice
served us a version of it at a street stall in Penang, Malaysia. It seems that    for this type of preparation.
Westerners had repeatedly asked him for shish kebabs, and since this was          But shoulder, while a little
                                                                                  chewier, is also a bit more
an Indonesian version of the Middle East classic, he called it an Indobob.
                                                                                  ﬂavorful, so we like that
     This recipe is actually pretty typical of the way that lamb is used in the   just a bit better. Shoulder
Far East. Because it has such a demonstratively strong ﬂavor, this meat           arm chops, shoulder blade
                                                                                  chops, and shoulder roast
matches up with other strong ﬂavors and a wide palate of spices.
                                                                                  are good choices.
     Serve this with white or brown rice, a watercress salad with lime vinai­
grette, and Carrot-Ginger Hobo Pack (page 442).



                                                      LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                     291
                                 F O R T H E P O W E R PA C K
                                 1⁄ 3   cup chopped peanuts
                                 3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh mint
                                 3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh cilantro
                                 3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh basil
                                 2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                 3 tablespoons sesame oil

                                 2 tablespoons olive oil
                                 1⁄ 3   cup curry powder
                                 3 tablespoons kosher salt
                                 2 tablespoons freshly cracked white pepper (or substitute black pepper)
                                 2 pounds boneless lamb leg or shoulder, cut into 1 ⁄ 2-inch cubes


                                 1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

                             2. Make the power pack: In a small bowl, combine all the ingredients
                        and mix well; set aside.
                             3. In a large shallow bowl, combine the olive oil, curry powder, salt,
                        and white pepper and mix well. Dry the lamb cubes with paper towels,
                        add them to the bowl, and toss well to coat thoroughly. Thread the lamb
                        onto skewers.
                               4. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are hot (you can hold
                        your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds), place the
                        kebabs on the grill and cook until well seared on the outside and done to
                        your likeness on the inside, 2 to 3 minutes per side for rare. To check for
                        doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Cut into one of the cubes of meat; it
                        should be slightly less done than you like it. When the meat is done,
                        remove the skewers from the grill, cover loosely with foil, and let them
                        rest for 5 minutes before serving.
                                 5.     Serve the lamb, passing the power pack for each person to add to
                        taste.




292   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Grilled Lamb and Peach Skewers                                                    THE CUT

                                                                                  See Indobob (page 291)

with Cumin-Raisin Vinaigrette                                                     for information on lamb
                                                                                  meat for skewers.

      S E RVE S 4



You might think that combining peaches and lamb in this way is a novel or
even original idea. But, in fact, some version of this dish—peaches and lamb
grilled together—has probably been served literally millions of times in the
Middle East, where lamb and fruit are a classic combination and grilling is an
everyday event. So if you have never tried this culinary pairing, you owe it to
yourself to make this dish.
      Serve with Simple Rice Pilaf (page 417), thick slices of grilled bread,
and a salad of cucumbers, raisins, and walnuts with a yogurt dressing.

      3 tablespoons kosher salt
      3 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
      3 tablespoons cracked coriander seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons ground
         coriander)
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh mint
      2 tablespoons minced garlic
      1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
      2 pounds boneless lamb leg or shoulder, cut into 1-inch cubes
      2 red bell peppers, cored, seeded, and cut into eighths
      2 red onions, peeled and cut into eighths
      2 peaches, pitted and cut into eighths

      FOR THE VINAIGRETTE
      1 ⁄4   cup golden raisins
      1⁄ 2   cup extra virgin olive oil
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
      3 tablespoons cumin seeds
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

       2. In a medium bowl, combine the salt, pepper, coriander, mint, gar­
lic, and olive oil. Dry the lamb cubes with paper towels, add to the bowl,
and toss well to coat thoroughly. Thread the meat cubes onto four long
skewers, alternating them with the peppers, onions, and peaches.
     3. In a small bowl, combine the vinaigrette ingredients and whisk
together well.



                                                         LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING               293
                                      4. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are hot (you can hold
                                your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds), place the
                                skewers on the grill and cook until the vegetables are tender and the lamb
                                is done to your liking, 3 to 4 minutes per side for rare. To check for done-
                                ness, nick, peek, and cheat: Cut into one of the cubes of meat; it should be
                                slightly less done than you like it. Remove the skewers from the grill and
                                allow to rest for 5 minutes.
                                      5. You have two serving options: You can slide the ingredients off the
                                skewers into a large bowl, add the vinaigrette, toss well, and serve. Or you
                                can simply serve each person his or her own skewer, drizzled generously
                                with the vinaigrette.




THE CUT

See Indobob (page 291)
                                Broiled Sherried Lamb Skewers
for information on lamb to
use for skewers.
                                with Dried Apricots and Green
                                Olive Dressing
                                        S E RVE S 4



                                One of the hallmarks of North African cooking is the use of green olives as a
                                ﬂavoring. We particularly like the combination of green olives and apricots,
                                another popular ingredient in the cooking of this region. The loamy, acidic
                                bite of the olives and the mellow sweetness of the apricots set each other off
                                perfectly. To provide another level of ﬂavor, we add sherry, which has a pretty
                                aggressive, musky undertone of its own. The result is a kind of new twist on
                                the classic shish kebab.
                                        Lamb leg is a ﬁne choice for the meat cubes here, but we slightly prefer
                                the shoulder. It does take a bit more time to cut shoulder meat into cubes
                                because of the fat and connective tissue, but those same factors also give it
                                a little more ﬂavor—and make it cheaper.
                                        We like to serve these by making a big batch of couscous or white rice,
                                putting it on a platter, sliding everything off the skewers, and putting the plat­
                                ter in the middle of the table for guests to help themselves. It has a certain
                                Berber air to it that makes it more fun to eat. Serve it with a salad of Romaine
                                lettuce, oranges, and red onions along with lavash, pita bread, or any other
                                ﬂatbread you can ﬁnd.



294           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      2 tablespoons minced garlic
      1 to 3 teaspoons hot pepper ﬂakes
      3 tablespoons olive oil
      1⁄ 2   cup dry sherry
      3 tablespoons cracked coriander seeds
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      2 pounds boneless lamb leg or shoulder, cut into 1-inch cubes
      2 red bell peppers, cored, seeded, and cut into 1-inch squares
      1 large red onion, peeled and cut into 1-inch chunks
      12 dried apricots

      FOR THE DRESSING
      1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped pitted green olives
      1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
      1 teaspoon minced garlic
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
      2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 lemon)
      2 tablespoons ﬁnely chopped orange zest (orange part only) (optional)
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Preheat the broiler, set on high if     you have a choice
      2. In a medium bowl, combine the garlic, hot pepper ﬂakes, olive oil,
sherry, coriander, and salt and pepper and mix well. Dry the lamb with
paper towels, then add it to the bowl, along with the peppers, onion, and
apricots and toss gently until everything is well coated. Thread the meat
onto four long skewers, alternating it with the peppers, onions, and apri­
cots.
     3. In a small bowl, combine the dressing ingredients and whisk to
mix well. Set aside.
      4. Place the skewers on the broiler pan and broil about 3 inches from
the heat source until well seared on the outside and done to your likeness
on the inside, about 5 minutes per side for rare. To check for doneness,
nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it
should be slightly less done than you like it. Remove the skewers from the
heat, cover loosely with foil, and allow to rest for 5 minutes.
      5.     Drizzle the skewers generously with the green olive dressing and
serve.




                                                            LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING   295
THE CUT

Technically called the lamb
                                Grilled Lamb Leg Steaks on
leg center slice, this is
really a steak cut from the
                                Eggplant Planks with Mint-Yogurt
thick center section of the
leg. You sometimes see          Sauce and Cucumber–Red Onion
this in supermarkets these
days, but more than likely      Relish
you will have to go to a
butcher, buy a leg, and get             S E RVE S 4
him to cut some of these
steaks for you. But that’s
                                Although it is sometimes called a leg chop, the cut of meat we’re using here
no problem, because
there are plenty of uses        is really a big ol’ lamb steak. The terminology comes from the days before
for the rest of the leg. For    electric band saws. In those times, a “chop” was any piece of meat that was
more information on this
                                separated from the carcass with a cleaver. Only relatively small cuts of meat
approach, see Getting a
Leg Up (page 257). Do           could be produced this way. The larger cuts that had to be cut with a saw,
make sure, though, that the     including those from the center of the leg, were called steaks.
butcher cuts your steaks at
                                        But as far as we’re concerned, you can call this cut whatever you like,
least 3 ⁄4 inch thick.
                                as long as you give it a try. It’s worth going to a butcher for, because it is an
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                exceptional piece of meat. It has more ﬂavor than chops from the loin, less fat
Lamb sirloin chops, which       and connective tissue than chops from the shoulder, and it works well with all
come from the upper sec­        kinds of ﬂavor footprints. Here we put the steaks in a Middle Eastern suit,
tion of the leg, are an
excellent substitute here.
                                serving them grilled on top of grilled eggplant planks with a straightforward
You can also substitute         minty yogurt sauce and a very simple relish. We think the whole combination
shoulder chops or rib           works really well.
chops.
                                        Serve this with couscous, Lima Beans with Bacon and Thyme (page
                                431), and a spinach salad with pomegranate seeds.

                                        F OR TH E SAU CE

                                        1 cup plain yogurt
                                        2 tablespoons honey
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh mint

                                        FOR THE RELISH

                                        1 red onion, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced
                                        1 cucumber, peeled, seeded, and diced small
                                        3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
                                        3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                        3 tablespoons cracked coriander seeds
                                        1 tablespoon kosher salt
                                        1 tablespoon freshly cracked black pepper
                                        Four 8- to 10-ounce lamb leg chops, 3 ⁄4 to 1 inch thick (or substitute
                                          center-cut lamb leg steaks), trimmed of external fat



296           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     FOR THE EGGPLANT                                                             COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE
     1 small eggplant, cut lengthwise into 4 slices about 3 ⁄4 inch thick        Chop any leftover lamb and
     3 tablespoons olive oil                                                     eggplant into cubes, com­
                                                                                 bine with any leftover rel­
     2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                                                                 ish, drizzle with any
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                       leftover sauce, and you’ll
                                                                                 be enjoying a great lamb
                                                                                 salad.
     1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

     2. Make the sauce: In a small bowl, combine the yogurt, honey, and
mint and mix well. Cover and refrigerate until serving time.
     3. Make the relish: In a small bowl, combine all the relish ingredients
and mix well; set aside.
      4. In a small bowl, combine the coriander, salt, and pepper and mix
well. Rub the chops all over with this mixture, pressing lightly to be sure it
adheres. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are hot (you can hold
your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 1 to 2 seconds), place the
chops on the grill and cook until well seared and done to your likeness, 4
to 5 minutes per side for medium-rare. To check for doneness, nick, peek,
and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it should be
slightly less done than you like it. Remove the chops from the heat, cover
with foil, and allow to rest while you grill the eggplant.
      5. Brush the eggplant slices with olive oil and sprinkle with the garlic
and salt and pepper. Place them on the grill and cook until well browned,
very soft, and moist all the way through, about 4 minutes per side.
      6. Place an eggplant plank on each plate, top with a lamb chop,
spoon a couple of tablespoons of sauce over the top, and serve, accompa­
nied by the relish.




                                                           LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING              297
THE CUT

Technically called lamb
                                Denver Lamb Ribs Adobo with
breast spareribs, these ribs
are popularly known as
                                Fresh Pineapple-Chipotle Glaze
Denver-style ribs or Denver
rack. They have a good                  S E RVE S 4

amount of gnarl and fat on
them, but, like other such      Denver ribs are the lamb equivalent of pork spareribs. Like their pork coun­
cuts, they respond very
                                terparts, they are excellent for a barbecue-style slow-roast approach. Here
well to long, slow cooking
over the indirect heat of a     we coat the ribs with a Latin-inspired spice rub, then put them off to the side
smoky ﬁre, a situation in       of the grill and let them cook for a long time over low, indirect heat.
which the fat helps keep
                                        Again, don’t be afraid to use big ﬂavors with lamb, because the meat
them moist. You are
unlikely to ﬁnd these in a      has the character to stand up to them. In this recipe, for example, we use hot
supermarket, but most           and smoky chipotles, earthy cumin, tangy citrus, sweet molasses, and musky
butchers will have them,
                                pineapple, and when you taste the dish, you’ll see that all these ﬂavors in no
and will be happy to sell
them to you quite cheaply.      way overpower the meat.
                                        Serve these with warm tortillas, some straight-up tomato salsa, and
                                Spicy Latin Black Beans (page 423) or Spanish Rice (page 419).

                                        FOR THE GLAZE

                                        2 cups pineapple juice
                                        1 cup red wine vinegar
                                        3 tablespoons molasses
                                        1 to 2 tablespoons minced canned chipotle peppers in adobo, or more to
                                           taste
                                        2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper

                                        2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                        2 tablespoons cumin seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground cumin)
                                        3 tablespoons paprika
                                        2 tablespoons kosher salt
                                        3 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
                                        1 tablespoon dark brown sugar
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
                                        1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
                                        Four 12- to 14-ounce racks of Denver lamb ribs


                                      1. In a medium saucepan, combine all the glaze ingredients. Bring
                                just to a boil over high heat, reduce the heat to medium-high, and simmer
                                until the mixture is reduced to about 1 cup, about 30 minutes. Remove
                                from the heat and set aside.
                                    2. Start a ﬁre well over to one side of a large kettle grill, using about
                                enough coals to ﬁll half of a large shoe box.


298           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      3. In a small bowl, combine the garlic, cumin, paprika, salt, pepper,
sugar, cilantro, and lime juice and mix well. Rub the racks all over with this
spice mixture, pressing lightly to be sure it adheres.
     4. When the ﬂames have died down and the coals are covered with
white ash, place the racks on the grill on the side away from the coals,
being careful that none of the ribs are directly over the coals. Put the lid on
the grill with the vents open one quarter of the way. Cook for 11⁄ 2 to 2
hours, adding a handful of fresh charcoal about every 30 minutes, until the
meat is so tender it pulls very easily away from the bone. During the last 30
seconds of cooking, brush the racks with the glaze. Serve 1 rack to each
person, passing the remaining glaze separately.




Stir-fried Lamb with Green                                                            THE CUT

                                                                                      You can use cuts from

Beans, Eggplant, and Peppers in                                                       either the leg or the shoul­
                                                                                      der for stir-frying, but we
                                                                                      prefer leg because the
Hoisin-Ginger Sauce                                                                   shoulder has more fat and
                                                                                      connective tissue. If you
      S E RVE S 4                                                                     use the shoulder, though,
                                                                                      do try to remove most or all
                                                                                      of the fat when you cut it
Lamb is popular in China, so here we make a classic Chinese-style stir-fry
                                                                                      into strips, since the quick
dish with lamb, several vegetables that are widely used in Asian cooking, and         cooking of the stir-fry
a ﬂavorful dressing featuring our favorite Chinese sauce, hoisin.                     method doesn’t allow a lot
                                                                                      of time for the fat to render.
      The key to stir-frying is to have all the ingredients cut up and the sauces
ready before you begin, because once you start, you can’t stop until the dish
is ready to eat. So the best approach is to prepare all the ingredients and
then line them up in little dishes next to the stove in the order that they will be
added to the pan. This is what French cooks call mise en place and the Boy
Scouts call being prepared. Either way, it’s crucial for successful stir-frying.
      To make the lamb easier to cut into thin slices, stick it in the freezer for
about 20 minutes before you slice it.
      Serve this over bowls of brown or white rice, and you’ve got a quick
and easy meal going.



                                                          LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                     299
                                FOR THE DRESSING

                                1 tablespoon Asian chili paste (or substitute 1 teaspoon each minced
                                   garlic, minced fresh chile pepper, and catsup)
                                1 ⁄4   cup soy sauce
                                1 ⁄4   cup rice wine vinegar
                                1 ⁄4   cup hoisin sauce
                                2 tablespoons peanut oil

                                1 pound boneless lamb leg, partially frozen and cut into thin strips
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked white pepper (or substitute black) to taste
                                1 ⁄4   cup peanut oil
                                1 pound green beans, trimmed
                                1 cup eggplant diced small (about 1 ⁄ 2 small eggplant)
                                1 large red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and cut into very thin strips
                                1 red onion, peeled and diced small
                                2 tablespoons sesame oil
                                2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                4 scallions (white and green parts), very thinly sliced on the bias


                             1. In a small bowl, combine the dressing ingredients and whisk
                        together well; set aside.
                              2. Sprinkle the lamb generously with salt and white pepper. Heat an
                        extra-large heavy sauté pan over high heat for 1 minute. Add 2 tablespoons
                        of the peanut oil and when it is smoking hot, add the lamb, in batches if
                        necessary to avoid crowding, and cook, stirring constantly and vigorously,
                        until the meat is just browned, about 1 minute. Transfer the lamb to a
                        bowl and cover to keep warm.
                               3. Add the remaining 2 tablespoons oil to the hot skillet, add the
                        green beans, and stir-fry over high heat, stirring constantly, for 2 minutes.
                        Add the eggplant cubes and cook, stirring, for 2 minutes. Add the red pep­
                        per strips and onion and cook, stirring, for 2 minutes more. Make a well in
                        the center of the pan, pushing the vegetables to the sides. Drizzle the
                        sesame oil into the center of the pan, add the ginger and garlic, and cook,
                        stirring, for 1 minute, stirring in the vegetables at the end.
                             4. Return the lamb to the pan and season with salt and white pepper.
                        Pour the dressing over the top, add the scallions, and toss to combine.
                        Serve at once, over bowls of hot steamed rice.




300   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                    RECIPES FOR
       SMALL TOUGH CUTS OF LAMB

    Persian-Style Lamb and Eggplant Stew with Tomatoes,   10 STEPS TO GREAT LAMB
                                                          STEWS
                                   Raisins, and Saffron
                                                           1. Dry the meat cubes.
                           Irish Lamb Stew, Straight Up
                                                           2. Season the meat
                                                              cubes generously.
         Lamb, Leek, and White Bean Stew with Oregano,
                              Walnuts, and Hard Cheese     3. Brown the meat cubes
                                                              well, in batches if
       Aromatic Lamb Stew with Peaches and Fresh Mint         necessary.

                                                           4. Remove the meat from
             Curried Lamb Stew with Okra and Tomatoes         the pot, adjust the
                                                              amount of fat in the
Layered Lamb, Onion, and Potato Casserole with Red Wine       pot, and sauté the
                                                              aromatics and
      New School Shepherd’s Pie with Sweet Potato Crust       vegetables.

                                                           5. Deglaze the pot with
   Spicy Lamb-and-Rice-Stuffed Squash with Dates, Mint,
                                                              some of the liquid.
                                         and Pine Nuts
                                                           6. Return the meat to the
                                                              pot along with enough
                                                              liquid to cover.

                                                           7. Bring to a simmer and
                                                              skim off any ﬁlm, then
                                                              reduce the heat to low
                                                              and simmer gently.

                                                           8. Check for doneness
                                                              early and often.

                                                           9. Skim the ﬁlm and fat
                                                              from the liquid.

                                                          10. Add any ﬁnal
                                                              seasonings, season to
                                                              taste with salt and
                                                              pepper again, and
                                                              serve.




                                                                                   301
THE CUT

As with other meats, you
                                 Persian-Style Lamb and Eggplant
are almost always going to
get better-quality lamb for
                                 Stew with Tomatoes, Raisins, and
stew if you buy a particular
cut and cube it up yourself.     Saffron
The top choices in this
department are cuts from                 S E RVE S 5 TO 6

the shoulder. They are very
ﬂavorful, have enough fat        Even though this layered dish could be called a casserole, we call it a stew in
to stay moist during long
cooking, and are consider­
                                 honor of its inspiration, a Persian-style khoresh, or stew. Lamb and eggplant
ably cheaper than cuts           have long been staples in the Middle East, where saffron is also a favored
from the leg, which is the       seasoning and fruit is frequently paired with meat. So here we have a little
other option. Shoulder arm
chops, shoulder blade
                                 Persian, or Iranian, action going on.
chops, and shoulder roast                As always with stews, an important key to achieving great ﬂavor is to be
are all excellent choices for    sure to brown the meat well at the very beginning. Also, although you may
stew meat. Since not all
stores carry a variety of
                                 think that you have more eggplant than you need here, persevere; it cooks
lamb shoulder cuts,              down beautifully and creates a nice, rich, thick liquid for the stew.
though, this is the kind of              Serve this with a Romaine salad with feta cheese, Persian Rice (page
situation in which you
might simply ask the
                                 418), and maybe some apricot chutney alongside.
butcher what cut of shoul­
der he has on hand and                   2 pounds boneless lamb shoulder, cut into 1-inch cubes
take a couple of pounds of               Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
it. Lamb shoulder neck                   3 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
slices are frequently used
                                         2 large eggplants, peeled and sliced into 1-inch rounds
for stews too, but be
warned that they have a                  2 onions, peeled and diced small
ton of connective tissue                 2 tablespoons minced garlic
and bone, which makes
                                         5 plum tomatoes, cored and diced small
them hard to cut into
                                         3 ⁄4   cup dark raisins
cubes.
                                         1 teaspoon ground allspice
                                         1 tablespoon ground coriander
                                         1 teaspoon saffron threads, dissolved in 1 ⁄ 2 cup hot water
                                         About 2 cups lamb or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                         1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh mint


                                         1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.

                                       2. Dry the lamb with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with
                                 salt and pepper. In a large sauté pan, heat 2 tablespoons of the oil over
                                 medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Add the lamb to the
                                 pan in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and brown
                                 well on all sides, about 15 minutes total; as the lamb is browned, transfer it
                                 to a bowl.



302            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      3. When all the lamb has been browned, add the remaining 1 table­             OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

spoon of oil to the pan, then add the eggplant slices in a single layer, in         Cuts from the lamb leg are
                                                                                    also ﬁne for stew meat.
batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and brown well on both sides,
                                                                                    While they are more expen­
about 5 minutes per side. As the eggplant is browned, transfer it to another        sive and have a bit more of
bowl.                                                                               a tendency to dry out, they
                                                                                    do have the advantage of
      4. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pan as needed so you have a total       having less fat and connec­
of about 2 tablespoons in the pan. Add the onions and cook, stirring occa­          tive tissue, so they are eas­
sionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic and cook, stirring,     ier to cut into cubes. Look
                                                                                    for lamb leg sirloin chops
for 1 minute more. Remove from the heat.
                                                                                    or buy the shank portion of
       5. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot with a           the whole leg. If you can’t
                                                                                    ﬁnd a good shoulder or leg
lid, layer the eggplant, lamb, and onions, starting and ending with the egg­        cut of lamb, you can always
plant. Add the tomatoes, raisins, spices, salt and pepper to taste, and             just pick up a package of
enough stock to just cover everything. (If you need more liquid, add some           “lamb stew meat” and
beer or more stock, but don’t overdo it, as the tomatoes will give off liquid       check to see there’s noth­
                                                                                    ing too horrible in there.
as they cook.) Bring to a simmer and skim any ﬁlm from the surface of the
liquid.
        6. Cover the pot, place in the oven, and cook until the lamb is tender,
11⁄ 2 to 2 hours. Serve hot, in bowls, sprinkling each portion with a bit of
mint.




Irish Lamb Stew, Straight Up
                                                                                    THE CUT

                                                                                    See Persian-Style Lamb
                                                                                    and Eggplant Stew (page
      S E RVE S 6 TO 8                                                              302) for details on lamb
                                                                                    meat for stew.
Our usual approach to stews is to brown the meat and sauté the aromatics,
then put everything in the pot together with the liquid and cook it until it’s
done. In the case of this Irish-style lamb and beer stew, though, we decided
to roast the vegetables separately, then add them to the meat and liquid at
the end. This approach results in vegetables with ﬁrmer texture and slightly
more distinct ﬂavors. We also used larger cubes of lamb than usual, so you
get a more deﬁnitive meat presence. Together, these adjustments make the
stew seem more substantial and just a bit more uptown than other versions
of this very familiar dish.
      Serve this with a plate of different kinds of pickles to add a little ﬂavor
jolt, Potatoes Macaire (page 414), and some Irish soda bread for sopping up
the stewing liquid.



                                                        LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                    303
                                3 pounds boneless lamb shoulder, cut into 2-inch cubes
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                3 tablespoons vegetable oil
                                2 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                2 large onions, peeled and diced small
                                3 tablespoons minced garlic
                                About 3 cups dark beer, such as Guinness
                                3 tablespoons olive oil
                                2 pounds red or white waxy potatoes, washed and quartered lengthwise
                                1⁄ 2   pound carrots (about 5 carrots), peeled and cut into 1-inch rounds
                                1⁄ 2   pound parsnips (about 6 parsnips), peeled and cut into 1-inch rounds


                                1. Preheat the oven to 425°F.

                              2. Dry the lamb with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with
                        salt and pepper. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot
                        with a lid, heat the vegetable oil over medium-high heat until very hot but
                        not smoking. Add the lamb in a single layer, in batches if necessary to
                        avoid crowding, and brown well on all sides, about 15 minutes total; as the
                        pieces are nicely browned, transfer them to a bowl.
                              3. Add the butter to the pot and melt over medium-high heat. Add
                        the onions and cook, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 min­
                        utes. Add the garlic and cook, stirring, for 1 minute more.
                              4. Return the meat to the pot and add the beer. (The liquid should
                        cover the other ingredients; if it does not, add more beer.) Bring to a sim­
                        mer, stirring to dissolve any brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan.
                        Skim any ﬁlm from the surface of the liquid, then cover, reduce the heat to
                        low, and simmer gently until the lamb is tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours.
                              5. While the stew is cooking, roast the vegetables: In a medium
                        bowl, toss 1 tablespoon of the olive oil with the potatoes and salt and pep­
                        per to taste. Spread the potatoes on a baking sheet and roast, stirring fre­
                        quently, until golden brown and tender, about 25 minutes. Do the same
                        with the carrots and parsnips, tossing them with the remaining 2 table­
                        spoons oil, spreading on one baking sheet, and roasting for about 17 min­
                        utes. Check for doneness by tasting the vegetables; they should be slightly
                        underdone. Remove from the oven.
                              6. When the meat is tender, add the vegetables to the stew and sim­
                        mer together for about 10 minutes more. Season with salt and pepper and
                        serve.




304   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Lamb, Leek, and White Bean                                                           THE CUT

                                                                                     See Persian-Style Lamb

Stew with Oregano, Walnuts, and                                                      and Eggplant Stew (page
                                                                                     302) for details on lamb

Hard Cheese                                                                          meat for stew.



      S E RVE S 6 TO 8



Somewhat similar to the French country classic cassoulet, this hearty stew
gets an extra ﬂavor dynamic from the aged cheese and toasted walnuts sprin­
kled on the top after it is ﬁnished cooking. We like to serve the stew on top of
big slabs of toasted country bread.
      When you buy leeks, look for ones with a relatively high proportion of
usable white and light green versus the dark green, which is too tough for
cooking. That dark green portion is very good in stocks, though, so you might
want to throw it in the freezer. Speaking of stock, we know that few people are
likely to have lamb stock sitting around, so this might be a good opportunity to
make some enriched chicken stock as described on page 32. Of course, you
can also go the route of substituting beer or a mixture of red wine and water
for the stock. And, by the way, if you are in a hurry or forget to soak the beans
overnight, you can shortcut the process by using a good variety of canned
beans; in that case, add them about 15 minutes before the stew is done.
      Serve this with a simple arugula salad and Roasted Beets (page 435).

      2 pounds boneless lamb shoulder, cut into 2-inch cubes
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper
      3 tablespoons olive oil
      4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter
      10 small or 5 large leeks (white and light green parts), well washed and
         halved lengthwise, then cut crosswise into 1 ⁄ 2-inch pieces
      3 tablespoons minced garlic
      4 plum tomatoes, cored and diced small
      1 pound dried cannellini or Great Northern white beans, picked over, rinsed,
         soaked overnight, and drained (or substitute two 16-ounce cans beans,
         drained and rinsed)
      3 bay leaves
      About 4 cups lamb or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      2 teaspoons ﬁnely chopped fresh oregano
      6 to 8 large slices country bread (1 per serving), toasted
      1 cup walnut halves, toasted in a dry sauté pan, shaken frequently, until
         fragrant, 4 to 5 minutes
      8 ounces Parmesan, Asiago, or other hard aged cheese, very thinly sliced
         or coarsely grated




                                                           LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                305
                                      1. Dry the meat with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with
                               salt and pepper. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with
                               a lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.
                               Add the lamb in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding,
                               and brown well on all sides, about 12 minutes total; as the pieces get nicely
                               browned, transfer them to a bowl.
                                     2. Add the butter to the pot and melt over low heat. Add the leeks,
                               cover, and cook until they are very soft but not browned, about 15 min­
                               utes. Uncover the pot, add the garlic, raise the heat to medium-high, and
                               cook, stirring, for 2 minutes. Add the tomatoes and sauté, stirring, 5 min­
                               utes more.
                                     3. Return the meat to the pot along with the beans, bay leaves, stock,
                               and 1 tablespoon salt. (The liquid should cover all the ingredients; if it does
                               not, add more stock or some beer.) Bring to a simmer, stirring to incorpo­
                               rate any brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pot. Skim any ﬁlm from
                               the surface of the liquid, then cover, reduce the heat to low, and cook,
                               skimming the ﬁlm from the surface periodically, until the meat is very ten­
                               der and the beans are cooked, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours. (If it seems as though the
                               stew is getting too thick, add a little water.)
                                     4. Remove the stew from the heat, stir in the oregano, and season
                               with salt and pepper. Place the toasted bread in the bottom of soup bowls,
                               ladle the stew over the top, sprinkle with the walnuts and cheese, and
                               serve hot.



THE CUT

See Persian-Style Lamb
                               Aromatic Lamb Stew with Peaches
and Eggplant Stew (page
302) for details on lamb
                               and Fresh Mint
meat for stew.
                                        S E RVE S 6



                               We are big fans of the lamb stews of the Middle East. They are highly aro­
                               matic and often have an enticing sweetness that comes from cooking fruit
                               along with the meat. To enhance that dynamic here, we sauté the peaches for
                               a few minutes to caramelize them just a bit before adding them to the stew
                               partway through the cooking process. That gives them a more complex,
                               slightly sweeter ﬂavor. Then for a little burst of fresh ﬂavor, we add some lime
                               juice and toss in some fresh mint about 20 minutes before the end. Although
                               there are relatively few ingredients in this dish, it achieves a very nice layered
                               ﬂavor.



306          H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     Serve this with Israeli couscous or Rice Pilaf with Almonds and Cur­
rants (page 478) and tabbouleh.

     2 pounds boneless lamb shoulder, cut into 1-inch cubes
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     3 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
     3 medium onions, peeled and diced small
     2 tablespoons tomato puree
     About 3 cups lamb or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
     2 tablespoons vegetable oil
     4 ripe peaches, pitted and quartered
     1⁄ 3   cup fresh lime juice (2 to 3 limes)
     1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh mint


       1. Dry the lamb with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with
salt and pepper. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with
a lid, heat the olive oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smok­
ing. Add the meat to the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to
avoid crowding, and cook until well browned on all sides, about 15 min­
utes total; transfer the pieces to a platter as they are done.
      2. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions and sauté, stirring occa­
sionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the tomato puree and
cook, stirring, for 2 more minutes.
      3. Return the meat to the pot and add the stock. (If there is not
enough liquid to cover all the ingredients, add additional stock or red wine
or beer.) Bring to a simmer, stirring to dissolve any brown crusty stuff in
the bottom of the pot. Skim any ﬁlm from the surface of the liquid, then
cover, reduce the heat to medium-low so the stew is kept just at a low sim­
mer, and cook for 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours, skimming the ﬁlm occasionally as it rises
to the surface.
       4. When the stew has cooked for about 11 ⁄ 2 hours, heat the vegetable
oil in a medium sauté pan over medium-high heat until hot but not smok­
ing. Add the peach quarters and cook, stirring, until golden brown on both
cut sides, about 5 minutes.
      5. Add the sautéed peaches to the stew, along with the lime juice and
salt and pepper to taste. Continue to cook until the meat is very tender, 20
minutes to 1 hour more.
     6. Remove the stew from the heat, stir in the mint, season with salt
and pepper if necessary, and serve hot.


                                                       LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING   307
THE CUT

See Persian-Style Lamb
                               Curried Lamb Stew with Okra
and Eggplant Stew (page
302) for details on lamb
                               and Tomatoes
meat for stew.
                                       S E RVE S 6



                               In India, where beef is forbidden to Hindus and pork to Muslims, goat and
                               lamb are the meats of choice for nonvegetarians. According to Julie Sahni
                               and other experts, many a ﬁne Indian dish has been spoiled by a mistransla­
                               tion—from English to English. It seems that Indians call goat meat “mutton.”
                               American and English cooks, seeing that term in recipes, have used the old
                               tough lamb that we know as mutton with decidedly poor results. For this
                               rather light stew, we’ll stick to lamb.
                                       Okra, a highly popular vegetable in India, goes into the pot shortly
                               before the stew is ﬁnished cooking so that it stays relatively crisp. But if you
                               like the rather slimy texture of long-cooked okra, which also helps thicken the
                               stew, you can add it earlier, after about half an hour of cooking.
                                       Serve this with basmati rice or plain long-grain rice and a carrot salad
                               or a salad of cucumbers and tomato.

                                       2 pounds boneless lamb shoulder, cut into 1-inch cubes
                                       Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                       3 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
                                       1 medium onion, peeled and thinly sliced
                                       6 cloves garlic, peeled and thinly sliced
                                       3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                       2 tablespoons curry powder
                                       1 teaspoon cayenne pepper, or to taste
                                       5 plum tomatoes, cored, peeled, and diced medium
                                       About 3 cups lamb or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                       1 pound small okra pods, stems trimmed and cut into rounds about 1 ⁄ 2 inch
                                          thick
                                       1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
                                       1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
                                       1 cup sour cream


                                      1. Dry the meat with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with
                               salt and pepper. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with
                               a lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.
                               Add the lamb in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding,
                               and brown well on all sides, about 15 minutes total; as the pieces are nicely
                               browned, transfer them to a platter.


308          H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      2. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onion and sauté, stirring occa­
sionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic, ginger,
curry, and cayenne pepper and cook, stirring, for 1 minute.
       3. Return the lamb to the pot, along with the tomatoes and stock.
(The liquid should just cover the other ingredients; if it does not, add more
stock, or beer.) Bring to a simmer and skim any scum off the top of the liq­
uid, then cover the pot, reduce the heat to medium-low so the stew is kept
just at a simmer, and cook, skimming the foam from the surface periodi­
cally, until the meat is tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours.
     4. Add the okra and cook, stirring once or twice, for about 10 min­
utes more, until it is tender. Remove from the heat, stir in the cilantro and
lime juice, and serve, garnishing each portion with a couple of table­
spoons of sour cream.




Layered Lamb, Onion, and Potato                                                       THE CUT

                                                                                      See Persian-Style Lamb

Casserole with Red Wine                                                               and Eggplant Stew (page
                                                                                      302) for details on lamb
                                                                                      meat for stew.
      S E RVE S 6 TO 8



Here’s one for all you fans of French country cooking. This is a pretty straight­
forward French-style dish in which we ﬁrst cook the lamb on top of the stove
with red wine and the traditional French trio of aromatic vegetables, then
layer it with potatoes and onions and bake the whole affair. Our friend Kay
Rentschler, who helped out with a lot of the work of putting this book
together, said that this dish reminds her of the type of peasant-style French
dish that people would bring down to the village baker to bake in his oven on
laundry day. Of course, one easy shortcut is to simply make a stew by adding
the onions, potatoes, garlic, and thyme along with the lamb (Step 4 below).
That still makes for an excellent dish; it’s just a little less dense and more liq­
uid than the casserole version.
      Serve this with a green salad and a side of Roasted Winter Squash
(page 435).



                                                          LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                  309
                                8 slices bacon, diced small
                                2 onions, peeled and diced small
                                1 carrot, peeled and diced small
                                1 stalk celery, diced small
                                1 head garlic, separated into cloves, peeled, and crushed
                                Olive oil as needed
                                2 pounds boneless lamb shoulder, cut into 1-inch cubes
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                2 cups dry red wine
                                About 2 cups lamb or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)

                                F O R T H E P O TA T O E S A N D O N I O N S

                                3 pounds new or Red Bliss potatoes, thinly sliced
                                2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh thyme
                                2 tablespoons kosher salt
                                1 tablespoon freshly cracked black pepper
                                2 large onions, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced


                              1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy ovenproof pot
                        with a lid, cook the bacon over medium-high heat until it has rendered its
                        fat but is slightly undercooked, about 5 minutes. Transfer to paper towels
                        or a brown paper bag to drain.
                              2. Drain all but about 3 tablespoons of fat out of the pot, add the
                        onions, carrot, and celery, and cook, stirring occasionally, until the onions
                        are golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic and cook, stirring, for 1
                        minute more. Using a slotted spoon, transfer the vegetables to a bowl,
                        leaving as much fat in the pot as possible.
                              3. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
                        of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Dry the lamb with paper towels and
                        sprinkle it generously with salt and pepper. Add the lamb to the pot in a
                        single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and brown on all
                        sides, about 15 minutes total; transfer the pieces to the bowl with the veg­
                        etables as they are done.
                              4. When all the lamb has been browned, add the wine to the pot and
                        bring to a simmer, stirring to incorporate any crusty brown bits stuck to
                        the bottom of the pot. Return the bacon, vegetables, and lamb to the pot,
                        and add the stock. (If all the ingredients are not covered by the liquid, add
                        additional stock, or dark beer.) Bring to a simmer and skim any ﬁlm from




310   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
the surface of the liquid, then cover, reduce the heat to low, and simmer
until the lamb is fork-tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours. When the lamb is done,
remove the meat from the pot, then strain and reserve the cooking liquid.
(Note: If you have decided for the stew option shortcut, adding the pota­
toes, onions, and thyme along with the lamb, don’t bother—you’re ready
to eat.)
      5. Preheat the oven to 325°F. Lightly oil a 3-quart casserole dish.

      6. Place the potato slices in a large bowl. Add the garlic, thyme, salt,
and pepper and mix well. Layer the lamb, onions, and potato mixture in
the casserole: Start with half the lamb, then add half the onions, and half
the potatoes, and repeat, so you end up with six layers, with potatoes on
top. Pour the reserved cooking liquid over the top, cover the dish tightly
with foil, place in the oven, and cook for 1 hour.
     7. Remove the foil and continue cooking until the potatoes are very
tender, about 30 minutes more. Serve hot.




                                                                                    THE CUT

                                                                                    The story with ground lamb
                                                                                    is approximately the same
                                                                                    as with ground beef: For
                                                                                    the best, buy a whole piece
                                                                                    of meat and ask your
New School Shepherd’s Pie with                                                      butcher to grind it for you.
                                                                                    Any cut from the shoulder
Sweet Potato Crust                                                                  or leg of the lamb will have
                                                                                    about the right mixture of
      S E RVE S 6 TO 8                                                              fat and meat; we slightly
                                                                                    prefer the shoulder,
                                                                                    because it has a little more
Shepherd’s pie was originally created as a way to use the leftovers from a          ﬂavor. If you buy prepack­
roast, and you can certainly substitute leftover roast lamb for the ground lamb     aged ground lamb in the
called for in this version. But this dish is so delicious that you shouldn’t wait   supermarket, on the other
                                                                                    hand, chances are good
until you have leftovers; ground lamb works just ﬁne. You can also use the          that it will be from the fat­
more traditional white potatoes instead of sweet potatoes, but we think our         tier parts of the lamb, like
approach gives the dish a deeper, more interesting ﬂavor.                           the breast or belly. But if
                                                                                    that is the only option, go
      This is one of the favorite staff dinners at the East Coast Grill and, like   ahead and buy it rather
many other ground meat dishes, it’s also very popular with kids.                    than deciding not to make
      Serve this with a big salad, and you’re all set.                              this or other ground lamb
                                                                                    dishes. Just drain off any
                                                                                    excess fat after sautéing
                                                                                    the lamb and you’ll be ﬁne.




                                                         LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                    311
                                4 large sweet potatoes, peeled and cut into 1 ⁄ 2-inch cubes
                                1 cup half-and-half, warmed
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                3 tablespoons olive oil
                                3 pounds ground lamb
                                3 tablespoons minced garlic
                                1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh herbs: any one or a combination of thyme,
                                       parsley, and/or basil
                                2 red onions, peeled and diced small
                                2 carrots, peeled and diced small
                                1 cup fresh or thawed frozen peas
                                3 tablespoons catsup
                                3 tablespoons A-1 sauce
                                1 tablespoon unsalted butter


                             1. Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil. Add the sweet potatoes
                        and cook until they are easily pierced with a fork but still offer some resis­
                        tance, about 15 minutes. Drain the potatoes, place them in a large bowl,
                        add the half-and-half and salt and pepper, and mash until the potatoes are
                        smooth. The mixture should be fairly loose.
                                2. Preheat the oven to 400°F.

                               3. In a large sauté pan, heat 1 tablespoon of the oil over medium-high
                        heat until hot but not smoking. Add the lamb and cook, stirring occasion­
                        ally, until well browned, 8 to 10 minutes. (If using prepackaged ground
                        lamb, you may need to drain off excess fat at this point.) Add the garlic and
                        cook, stirring frequently, for 2 minutes more. Add the herbs and stir to mix
                        well, then transfer the lamb to a bowl and set aside.
                               4. Wipe out the sauté pan, return it to medium-high heat, and heat
                        the remaining 2 tablespoons oil until hot but not smoking. Add the onions
                        and carrots and cook, stirring occasionally, until the onions are golden
                        brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the peas, catsup, and A-1 sauce and cook,
                        stirring frequently, for 4 minutes. Add the lamb mixture, stir to combine,
                        and season with salt and pepper.
                             5. Spread the lamb mixture in a 3-quart casserole dish. Cover the top
                        completely with the sweet potatoes, swirling the potatoes with the back of
                        a spoon to add some surface texture. Dot with the butter, place in the
                        oven, and bake until the lamb mixture bubbles and the potatoes are golden
                        brown on top, about 40 minutes. Serve hot.




312   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Spicy Lamb-and-Rice-Stuffed                                                           THE CUT

                                                                                      See New School Shep-

Squash with Dates, Mint, and                                                          herd’s Pie (page 311) for
                                                                                      information on ground

Pine Nuts                                                                             lamb.



      S E RVE S 4



Stuffed vegetables are a long and honorable tradition in Middle Eastern
cuisines. Since lamb is the meat of choice there, it is very often used in the
stufﬁng mixtures. Not coincidentally, it’s ideal for this purpose, because its
distinctive ﬂavor does not get lost in the stufﬁng.
      Although zucchini and eggplant are the most common stuffed vegeta­
bles, here we use acorn squash. We like it because it has a richer, deeper ﬂa­
vor than squashes that mature earlier in the season, like zucchini and summer
squash.
      Serve this with grilled pita bread and a salad of watercress, cucum­
bers, tomatoes, and feta cheese—or some purslane if you can get hold of it.

      2 medium acorn squash
      2 tablespoons vegetable oil
      1 pound ground lamb
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      2 tablespoons unsalted butter
      1 medium onion, peeled and diced small
      3 cloves garlic, peeled and minced
      2 ripe tomatoes, cored and roughly chopped
      1⁄ 2   teaspoon ground cinnamon
      2 tablespoons cracked coriander seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground coriander)
      11 ⁄ 2 cups plain yogurt, mixed with 1 cup water until smooth
      1⁄ 2   cup pitted dates, chopped small
      1⁄ 2   cup pine nuts, toasted in a 350°F oven until lightly browned, about 10
             minutes
      1 cup cooked brown or white rice
      1 ⁄4   cup ﬁnely chopped fresh mint
      3 tablespoons ﬁnely chopped fresh parsley


      1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.

      2. Prebake the squash: Cut the squash lengthwise in half and scoop
out the seeds. Rub the cut sides of both squash with the oil, then place cut
side down in a baking dish and cook until quite tender, about 45 minutes.
Let cool slightly.


                                                             LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                313
                              3. As soon as the squash is cool enough to handle, scoop out the pulp
                        into a bowl, leaving a 1⁄ 2-inch layer of pulp inside the shells. Place the shells
                        right side up in the baking dish and set both pulp and shells aside.
                              4. Heat a large heavy sauté pan over high heat until very hot. Sprin­
                        kle the lamb generously with salt and pepper, then add tablespoon-sized
                        chunks of the lamb to the pan (you will not need to add any oil), in batches
                        so that the individual chunks are not touching. Let the lamb chunks brown
                        undisturbed on one side, then turn and brown on the other side, about 2
                        minutes per side. Transfer to a paper towel–lined plate.
                              5. Pour off the fat from the pan, turn the heat down to medium, and
                        add the butter. As soon as it is melted, add the onion and cook slowly, stir­
                        ring occasionally, until very soft and golden, about 12 minutes. Add the
                        garlic, tomatoes, cinnamon, and coriander and cook, stirring occasionally,
                        for 5 minutes.
                               6. Return the browned lamb to the pan, along with the diluted
                        yogurt, and stir to combine. Turn the heat down to very low and simmer
                        for 10 minutes, stirring every few minutes. Uncover the pan and stir in the
                        reserved squash pulp, along with the dates, pine nuts, rice, mint, and pars­
                        ley. Season with salt and pepper.
                              7. Sprinkle the insides of the squash shells with salt and pepper, then
                        spoon the ﬁlling into the cavities, creating a high rounded crown. Cover the
                        baking dish loosely with aluminum foil and bake until the squash is heated
                        through, about 20 minutes. Remove the foil and continue to bake until the
                        top of the ﬁlling has browned slightly, about 10 minutes. Serve hot.




314   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                  RECIPES FOR
ODD CUTS OF LAMB: OFFAL ET AL.

 Broiled Lamb Kidneys with Grainy Mustard Sauce and
                       Watercress and Tomato Salad

     Lamb Tongues on Toast with Bacon and Tomatoes




                                                      315
THE CUT

Unlike the more familiar
                                 Broiled Lamb Kidneys with Grainy
veal kidneys, which consist
of a number of pieces of
                                 Mustard Sauce and Watercress
meat gathered around a
center of fat, lamb kidneys      and Tomato Salad
look like giant kidney
beans. (Hence the name of                S E RVE S 4

the beans.) These kidneys
are easy to trim—it involves     Less is more when cooking lamb kidneys, which are extremely delicate. Their
scooping out the little cen­
ter core of fat–but you
                                 most prized characteristic is their tenderness, which is maintained by under-
might as well ask the            rather than overcooking them. Here we broil them quickly, then make a simple
butcher to do it for you.        mustard-butter-wine sauce with the pan drippings. Served with a simple
                                 watercress and tomato salad, this is a kind of elegant and unusual dish to
                                 serve to your more adventurous culinary pals.

                                         8 lamb kidneys (about 11 ⁄ 2 pounds total), split and trimmed of center fat

                                         F OR TH E SAU CE

                                         8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter, at room temperature
                                         1 ⁄4   cup grainy mustard
                                         3 tablespoons minced shallots
                                         1 tablespoon roughly chopped fresh parsley
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         1 cup dry red wine

                                         FOR THE SALAD

                                         2 bunches watercress, tough stems removed, washed, and dried
                                         2 beefsteak tomatoes (about the size of a baseball), cored and quartered
                                         1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                         2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 lemon)
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                         4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter, melted
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                     1. In a large pot of boiling salted water, parboil the kidneys for 1
                                 minute. Drain, dry well, and set aside.
                                         2. Preheat the broiler to high if    you have a choice.
                                       3. In a small bowl, combine the softened butter with the mustard,
                                 shallots, and parsley and mix well. Season with a little salt and pepper,
                                 cover, and set aside. (This butter can be made ahead and refrigerated.
                                 Bring to room temperature before using.)



316            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
    4. In a large bowl, combine the watercress, tomatoes, olive oil, and
lemon juice. Toss the salad gently, season with salt and pepper, and divide
among four plates.
      5. Dip the kidneys in the melted butter, season with salt and pepper,
and place in a medium roasting pan. Broil 3 inches from the heat source
until just nicely seared on one side, 3 to 4 minutes. Turn and continue
cooking to the desired doneness, 3 to 4 minutes more for rare. To check
for doneness, make a 1⁄4-inch cut in one of the kidneys; it should be pink
inside, but not raw looking. Transfer to a warm plate and cover to keep
warm while you make the sauce.
     6. Place the roasting pan on the stove over medium-high heat and
add the wine. Bring to a simmer, stirring to dissolve the browned bits in
the bottom of the pan. Cook until the wine is reduced by about half, 10 to
15 minutes. Stir in the reserved butter mixture, a little at a time, until all
the butter is incorporated; the sauce should be thick enough to coat the
back of a spoon. Season with salt and pepper.
      7. Add the warm kidneys and any accumulated juices to the sauce
and heat for 1 minute, then transfer to the plates with the salads and serve
right away.




Lamb Tongues on Toast with
Bacon and Tomatoes
      S E RVE S 4                                                                  THE CUT

                                                                                   There is no mystery about
                                                                                   this cut—it’s the tongue of
Okay, so now we’re getting out there on the culinary fringe. But in many Arab
                                                                                   the lamb. It is often sold
countries, where “meat” means “lamb,” every part of the animal is used, and        pickled, though, so locating
the tongues are quite a delicacy. Italian cooks also like them. They have a very   fresh ones can be difﬁcult.
                                                                                   If there is a halal, or Ortho­
soft, almost silky texture and a more delicate ﬂavor than any other part of the
                                                                                   dox Islamic, butcher in your
lamb. The down side to lamb tongue is that, like many organ meats, it              town, that’s a good place to
requires quite a bit of advance preparation. Once that is done, though, you        try. Tongue also freezes
                                                                                   very well, so if all you ﬁnd
have some very unusual and tasty meat. Here we serve it on toast with a rich,
                                                                                   is frozen ones, that’s no
smooth sauce of bacon, tomatoes, and sherry.                                       problem.

      4 lamb tongues
      1 tablespoon kosher salt
      1 large onion, peeled and thinly sliced




                                                        LAMB: IT MIGHT AS WELL BE SPRING                    317
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                   2 carrots, peeled and thinly sliced
This dish is actually very               2 stalks celery, diced small
good made with beef or                   1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
veal liver as well. Simply
sauté the liver, then jump               1 small bunch parsley, leaves roughly chopped and stems reserved
into the recipe at Step 3.               4 teaspoons fresh thyme leaves (or 2 teaspoons dried thyme)
                                         2 whole cloves

                                         F OR TH E SAU CE
                                         1⁄ 2   pound slab bacon, diced large
                                         1 ⁄4   cup minced shallots
                                         4 plum tomatoes, cored and diced medium
                                         2 tablespoons sherry
                                         2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, cut up
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                         4 large slices country bread, toasted and lightly buttered


                                       1. Scrub the tongues with a vegetable brush under cold running
                                 water. Let them soak in cold water for 2 hours, then place them in a Dutch
                                 oven and add the salt and cold water to cover. Bring the water to a simmer,
                                 skimming the foam that rises to the surface. Add the onion, carrots, celery,
                                 lemon juice, parsley stems, thyme, and cloves and simmer, partially cov­
                                 ered, until the tongues are tender, about 2 hours.
                                       2. Drain the tongues and place them in a bowl of cold water to cool. As
                                 soon as they are cool enough to handle, peel them: Cut a slit down the back of
                                 each tongue from the base to the tip with a small paring knife. Run your ﬁn­
                                 gers under the skin and separate it from the meat. Slice the meat crosswise into
                                 medallions, or lengthwise in half. Place on a platter, cover with foil, and place
                                 in the oven set on the lowest setting to keep warm while you make the sauce.
                                        3. In a large sauté pan, cook the bacon over medium-low heat until
                                 crisp. Using a slotted spoon, transfer the bacon to the platter of tongue,
                                 leaving 3 tablespoons of the rendered fat in the sauté pan, and return the
                                 platter to the oven. Add the shallots to the pan and cook over low heat,
                                 stirring occasionally, until softened, 2 to 3 minutes. Raise the heat to
                                 medium-high, add the tomatoes, and cook, stirring occasionally, for 3 min­
                                 utes more. Pour in the sherry and bring just to a simmer, then stir in the
                                 butter, a little at a time, until all of it is incorporated.
                                      4. Add the tongue and bacon to the sauce and turn a few times to
                                 coat well. Season with salt and pepper, sprinkle with the chopped parsley,
                                 and serve on the buttered toast.




318            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                                                                                   PORK:
                                      SWINE                             of the           TIMES




I   f we were exiled to the proverbial desert island and had to choose only

one kind of meat to eat for the rest of our lives, pork would have to get the

nod. Not only does it have a wonderful, rich, distinctive taste, it is also the most versatile of meats.
        Of course, it also helps that we were born, respectively, in Virginia and Iowa, two of
the top rivals for pork epicenter of the United States.
        As a kid, one of my (Chris’s) absolute favorite moments was when the guys would
show up at my parents’ house on the beach to cook a whole pig. I knew that after they had
dug the pit, laid the ﬁre, and spent the night sitting around in lawn chairs drinking beers,
telling outrageous stories, and every so often feeding the smoldering ﬁre with hickory logs,
we would be rewarded in the morning with outstanding pork barbecue. Crisp and crunchy
on the outside, buttery soft and moist on the inside, with its rich, smoky ﬂavor, it’s one of
my favorite childhood memories.
        And, of course, there were those pork spareribs. After spending hours cooking slow
and low, just out of reach of the ﬂames from a hardwood ﬁre, they’d be so tender that just
a little tug would pull them right off the bone, the chewy interior meat rich as bacon on the
tongue, the exterior sticky-sweet from caramelization.
        Even that was just the beginning. A smoky, salty country ham from nearby Smith­
ﬁeld, where the pigs ate a diet of peanuts, was a ﬁxture of my family’s holiday table, and to
this day, bacon and sausage are among my favorite foods.

                                                                                                           319
              Growing up in central Iowa, I (Doc) was raised on stories of how my grandfather
      would always wait until after the ﬁrst freeze to butcher the pigs on the family farm. My
      mother and grandmother would then make sausages, put the hams in big boxes of salt to
      cure, brine a few other large cuts, and stash the rest in the cold house to stay frozen through
      the winter months. In celebration of the event, there would always be a fresh pork loin
      roast for dinner that Sunday.
              That was a tradition that my grandmother continued long after Grandpa was dead and
      she had moved into town from the farm. When she took her pork loin roast out of the oven on
      a Sunday afternoon, its outer layer of crispy fat dark brown and glistening, it was a moment of
      glory. And when she cut it into thick slices and served it up with her braised red cabbage, the
      juicy pork had a rich, lingering, mellow taste that could not be matched by any other meat.
              But the fact that we are both partial to pork does not exactly single us out among diners
      of the world. Pork is the most widely eaten of all red meats, and while lamb may have been the
      ﬁrst animal to be domesticated, it is the pig that has been the best friend to humankind.
              Pigs are remarkably easy to raise, demanding nothing more than table scraps, a bit of
      garbage, or the freedom to forage for their own food in ﬁelds or forests. Every single last part of
      the pig can be eaten, either as a dish in itself or as a ﬂavoring for other dishes. With two litters a
      year, pigs are also rapid reproducers. Equally important, at least to the vast majority of humans
      who lived in the eras before mechanical refrigeration, pork is the easiest of all meats to pre­
      serve. Because of its low moisture content, it takes particularly well to salting and brining, and
      it can also readily be smoked or preserved in its own fat, in the manner of French conﬁt.
              Pigs were not native to America, but because they were ideal shipboard animals (if
      provisions ran low, they could be butchered and their meat preserved in salt brine for the
      rest of the voyage), they came here with the ﬁrst European explorers. Put ashore, they
      thrived in the new country and spread out across its vast expanses along with the new set­
      tlers. Whenever an East Coast family set out for the new lands to the west, there were
      always a few pigs trotting alongside the wagons, ﬁnding their own food as they went.
              When they were ﬁrst brought here, pigs were raised much as they had been in the Old
      World, feeding on table scraps, garbage, and what they could forage from surrounding ﬁelds
      and forests. Back then, this was no great hardship, since the woods were ﬁlled with acorns,
      hazelnuts, and beechnuts. Even so, the pigs of that day were relatively lean and scrawny.
              But shortly after the Native Americans had introduced the European settlers to corn,
      the colonists decided to try feeding it to their pigs for the last couple of months before slaugh­
      ter. As it turned out, this not only increased the pigs’ fat content, but also gave their meat a
      ﬁrmer texture and a richer ﬂavor. In one of those serendipities that occur every once in a while
      in nature, pigs also proved to be amazingly efﬁcient at converting corn to meat. It takes about
      ﬁve times as much corn to produce a pound of beef, for example, as it does a pound of pork.
              When settlers began to fan out across the Midwest, this alliance of meat and grain
      really came into its own. The great Central Plains were ideal for raising corn, and farmers
      could afford to feed their pigs almost exclusively on it. Soon they had developed a new style
      of pig, far fatter than its ancestors. Meat from this porker came to dominate the American
      diet; in fact, our forefathers ate more pork than any other single foodstuff except wheat.
              Most of the pork being eaten in America at that time was not fresh, but salted or


320   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
cured. In those days, many homes had a barrel in the basement or root cellar where cuts of
pork were kept submerged in a heavily salted brine throughout the year, to be pulled out
and used as needed. This constant source of meat was the origin of the phrase “pork bar­
rel,” to denote expensive projects designed by politicians to reward supporters and curry
favor with voters.
        With the invention of the refrigerated railroad car in 1870, though, fresh pork began
to be more common. The pigs that were being slaughtered and shipped across the country
at that point were even fatter than their predecessors. Since they no longer had to be able to
walk long distances to market, they could be bred for a higher proportion of lard to meat.
This was very desirable, because in those days, lard was truly an all-purpose product. Not
only was it the primary fat used in cooking and baking, it was also employed as fuel for
lamps, as a lubricant, and even in munitions. As a result, a “good hog” was one that was
almost 50 percent fat by weight, with a solid three-inch layer of fat along its back.
        Not surprisingly, hogs bred and fed to produce a three-inch fat layer also produced
meat heavily marbled with the artery-clogging substance. Even after lard began to be sup­
planted by vegetable-based oils and other products, Americans continued to favor very fatty
pork for a time. But in the early 1960s, newly health-conscious diners began trying to
reduce the amount of saturated fat in their diets, and pork began to drop from favor.
        Seeing their market share dwindle, hog producers began a campaign to produce a leaner,
more marketable product. By modifying feeding programs and crossing American “lard type”
pigs with the leaner, longer-bodied “bacon type” pigs that breeders in Europe had been perfect­
ing, they succeeded: Today’s pork has, on average, about 50 percent less fat than it did in the early
1960s. Cuts from the loin have seen an almost 70 percent fat reduction during that period.
        Of course this is good news for our health. It’s not such great news, however, for our
taste buds. Since fat is a carrier of ﬂavor—a leaner pig is a less ﬂavorful pig. But there are
several ways to deal with this. To begin with, the new leaner version of pork should in gen­
eral not be cooked as long as its predecessor. Fortunately, the near-total elimination of
trichinosis means that it’s possible to reduce cooking times without threatening your
health. Choosing some of the more underused but tasty cuts of pork, cooking bone-in cuts,
and searing them hard at the beginning of the cooking process are also good ways to
increase the ﬂavor potential of the new pork.
        Finally, it is easy to boost the ﬂavor quotient of today’s pork by combining it with a
whole range of other ﬂavorful ingredients. Pork’s relatively mild but still distinctive ﬂavor is
a perfect foil for everything from chile peppers and the bright, intense ﬂavors of tropical
foods to the more subtle palette of Mediterranean cuisines.


       ABOUT CUTS OF PORK

       Pork may no longer be America’s #1 meat, but it is still a central part of our every­
day diet. That means that you can buy a wide variety of good-quality cuts at any neighborhood
supermarket, and the options for all kinds of cooking methods are many and exciting.
       Unlike the steer, the calf, and the lamb, which we break down into four primary sec-


                                                                    PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES            321
      tions, we are going to break the pig into only three such sections. That’s because in the pig,
      the loin and the rib are treated as one section rather than two.


                                 Flavorful Home of the
                                      Boston Butt     Prodigious Producer
                                                       of Perfect Pork       Ham
                                                                            Section




              Starting from the front, we have the shoulder, which we like to call the Flavorful Home
      of the Boston Butt, perhaps the most versatile cut of meat of all. You can roast it, you can
      steak it, you can braise it, you can cut it into chunks and use it in stews. What the option play
      is to college football, the Boston Butt is to pork—many things can occur when you have a
      pork butt in the refrigerator. The Picnic Shoulder is another, slightly gnarlier cut from the
      front of the hog that is good for braising. The shoulder region also gives us the blade steak and
      the ﬂavorful ham hock, often used to add ﬂavor to a large pot of beans or greens.
              Everything from the shoulder back to the start of the leg is included in the loin. Any
      way you slice it, this is the Prodigious Producer of Perfect Pork Section. The loin itself is a
      roast, known as the rack of pork, which can also be divided into several separate roasts includ­
      ing the blade loin roast, sirloin loin roast, center rib roast, and center loin roast. The pork ten­
      derloin also comes from the loin, as do the many variations on pork chops: rib chops, loin
      chops, sirloin chops, and center-cut chops. From the belly, which we are including in the loin,
      come bacon and pork spareribs, and what more can we say about those fatty delights?
              Finally we come to the leg, which is not called the round. If it were in lamb it would be
      leg of lamb, if it were in beef or veal it would be the steamship round. But in the pig it is ham.
              Now let’s look at cuts of pork from the point of view of how you cook them.
              When it comes to roasts, you have what is perhaps the single most versatile and
      adaptable of all cuts of red meat, the center cut pork loin. It provides tender, ﬁne-grained
      roasts both bone-in and boneless. The rib roast, also known as the rack of pork, is the equiv­
      alent of a beef prime rib, and you know how good that is. Perhaps the most neglected cut
      for roasting is the fresh ham, which is the uncured hind leg of the pig; it makes a magniﬁ­
      cent roast whether cooked in the oven or in a covered grill.
              The tenderloin, which is not only the most tender cut of pork but also the leanest, is
      another of our favorites for roasting. It is widely available these days, it’s totally simple to
      cook, doesn’t take long, and adapts to all sorts of ﬂavor treatments. Because it’s so small, it
      can also be grilled.
              And speaking of cuts that are in a border zone and can be prepared using more than
      one type of cooking method, let’s look at the Boston butt. This cut, which falls right on the



322   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
dividing line between tough and tender large cuts of pork, may be the single most under­
rated cut of red meat. It is just tender enough to roast, but also responds well to braising,
and it has a tremendous amount of pork ﬂavor. If that’s not enough to send you in its direc­
tion, it’s also inexpensive, and when you put it over the indirect heat of a smoky ﬁre for 12
to 14 hours, it becomes the incomparable shredded pork barbecue.
         And while we’re on the subject of long, slow cooking, let’s not neglect spareribs. Any of
you who grew up in the South or the Midwest know the virtues of these slightly gnarly, ultra-
ﬂavorful beauties. They come from the part of the pig that is right underneath the bacon, and
they have all the rich ﬂavor that suggests, combined with the pleasure of eating meat on the
bone. For those occasions when you want ribs in a hurry, baby backs are a good choice.
         In addition to the Boston butt, other cuts from the shoulder area, such as the shoul­
der blade roast and the picnic shoulder, are not only fantastic for braising but they are also
the best single source for cubes of pork to use in stews. We particularly enjoy pork stews
because this is the way that cooks in the hot-weather world most often use pork. That
makes pork stews the ideal vehicles for a wild variety of ﬂavor combinations.
         In the small tender department, where you’ll ﬁnd those cuts of pork that are cooked
with dry heat, you’ve got to start with one of the most favored cuts of all, the chop. There
are ﬁve varieties of chops cut from the loin of the pig. While each has its distinct character,
they are all tender, ﬂavorful, and easy to cook. Thick or thin, stuffed or spice-rubbed, grilled
or sautéed or broiled, these are among the most versatile and tasty cuts of meat we know.
Pork cutlets, ﬁllet, and scalloppini, which are basically variations on the theme of chops
without bones, provide yet other ways to enjoy this part of the pig.
         Finally, to represent the cuts of pork that follow an earlier American tradition and are
used primarily as ﬂavorings, we have included recipes for ham hocks, both fresh and cured.
         As we pointed out, it’s generally not a good idea to cook pork as long or as hard as
our grandparents did. Because of trichinosis, which was widespread in the days when hogs
were fed largely on raw table scraps and other garbage, it used to be essential to cook all
pork well-done. But since trichinosis is all but nonexistent in today’s animals, pork does not
need to be cooked any longer than other red meats.
         Of course, if you prefer to continue to cook your pork to well-done, that’s certainly
your prerogative. As we’ve said elsewhere, we’re not about to tell you how you should like
your meat. You bought it, and you’re entitled to cook it until it’s as done as you like.
         Our preference, though, is to cook tender cuts of pork to medium. That means leav­
ing a bit of pink in the middle and removing roasts from the oven when the thermometer
reads 147°F or so. Assuming you let the meat rest after you remove it from the heat, this
actually gives you the best of both worlds. The internal temperature will continue to rise as
the meat reposes and should reach almost 155°F in 10 to 15 minutes. This will result in
meat that is free of harmful bacteria, but still blushingly pink, tender, and succulent.
         As with other types of meat, we also prefer really thick versions of tender cuts of
pork. In this case, that mainly applies to chops, and it’s relatively easy to ﬁnd chops that are
11⁄ 2 to 2 inches thick in the supermarket. For some reason, they have caught on with the
public while thicker cuts of other types of meat have not. But if you can’t get hold of a thick



                                                                  PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES           323
      chop, go ahead and buy the thinner version. You simply need to shorten the cooking time
      in the recipe and start checking for doneness particularly early to make sure you don’t cook
      it more than you were intending to.

             OU R TOP 5 FAVOR ITE CUTS OF POR K

             1. Boston butt

             2. Spareribs

             3. Tenderloin

             4. Double-thick rib chop

             5. Fresh ham



             BUYING PORK

              It’s easy to find good-quality pork in this country. Pigs are slaughtered young, so
      tenderness is not really an issue. Grading is another non-issue. Pork may be graded, but it has
      completely different rating categories than other meats, ranging from USDA 1 at the top to
      USDA 4 at the bottom. The grades have to do with the amount of lean versus fat on the pig,
      with the highest grade going to the highest proportion of lean to fat. However, since most
      markets sell only Grade 1 pork at this point, there’s no reason to be concerned with it.
              When buying pork, you should look for meat that is light to dark pink, rather than
      gray or red. Also be sure that the meat looks moist rather than dry, and that the external fat
      is smooth, creamy, and white. The meat should be ﬁne-textured, with little or no fat
      streaked through the muscle itself, and, above all, it should be ﬁrm rather than mushy to the
      touch. Since there is a wide variety in the skill with which pork is butchered, you also want
      to look for cuts that look neatly severed, with no ragged edges.
              Fresh pork will keep in the refrigerator, tightly wrapped, for three or four days.
      Because of its low water content, pork does not freeze quite as well as beef or lamb. It will
      keep in the freezer, again tightly wrapped (see page 27), for up to six months, but it is really
      best to use it after a month or six weeks.
              Unlike lamb, pork is not generally imported; unlike beef, it is not yet sold under
      brand names. So buying it is a pleasure. It’s pretty simple, it’s pretty inexpensive, and it’s
      wholly delicious.




324   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                     RECIPES FOR
       LARGE TENDER CUTS OF PORK

   Maple-Glazed Fresh Ham with Hard Cider–Raisin Sauce       10 STEPS TO GREAT ROASTED
                                                             PORK

Grill-Roasted Rum-Brined Fresh Ham with Mango Salsa and       1. Preheat the oven.
                           Grilled Pineapples and Bananas
                                                              2. Dry the meat.

     Cumin-Crusted Grilled Boneless Pork Loin with Grilled    3. Season the meat well.
                        Avocados and Apple-Chipotle Salsa
                                                              4. Put the roast on a rack
                                                                 in a roasting pan, set
                  Roast Pork Loin with Spicy Hoisin Sauce,
                                                                 on the middle shelf of
                                     “Peking Duck–Style”         the preheated oven,
                                                                 and sear.
        Roast Pork Loin with Apricot-Sausage Stuffing and
                                                              5. Turn down the oven
                                     Rosemary-Garlic Jus
                                                                 temperature.

     Ginger-Rubbed Rack of Pork with Chile-Lychee Sambal      6. Add the vegetables,
                                                                 if any.
   Roast Sage-Garlic Pork Butt with Roasted Pineapple and
                                                              7. Check for doneness
                         Onions and Sweet Mustard Sauce
                                                                 early and often.

                                                              8. Transfer the meat to a
                                                                 platter, cover loosely
                                                                 with foil, and allow to
                                                                 rest for 10 to 20
                                                                 minutes, depending
                                                                 on size.

                                                              9. Pour off the excess fat
                                                                 from the pan, add
                                                                 stock, deglaze, and
                                                                 simmer to reduce the
                                                                 liquid.

                                                             10. Carve and serve,
                                                                 passing the jus
                                                                 separately.




                                                                                      325
THE CUT

What we are calling for here
                                 Maple-Glazed Fresh Ham with
is basically an uncured
bone-in half pork leg. You
                                 Hard Cider–Raisin Sauce
can get either the rump or
shank section of the leg,                S E RVE S 10 TO 12

each of which has its
advantages. (Sometimes           There is a common misconception that ham refers only to the hind leg of a
you will see a center-cut
                                 hog that has been cured and/or smoked. Well, that is a ham all right. On the
roast from the leg, but it is
usually smaller than the         other hand, so is that same hind leg if it is uncured and unsmoked. To distin­
roast we are looking for         guish it from the cured version, it has come to be called a “fresh ham,” and it
here.) The rump half, which
                                 is a wonderful piece of meat. Sweet, tender, juicy, and full of pork ﬂavor, it is
is rounded, has a higher
proportion of meat to bone,      also much cheaper than the more traditional loin roast, which makes it ideal
but we slightly prefer the       for big, celebratory dinners. Make sure the ham you buy is bone-in and skin-
shank half, which is tapered,
                                 on; the bone adds lots of ﬂavor, and the crispy skin is our favorite part of the
because it is easier to
carve and a bit less fatty.      meal.
Although fresh hams are                  In this version, we rub the ham with a sweet and earthy spice paste,
beginning to show up more
                                 then ﬁnish up with a simple pan sauce with raisins and some reduced hard
often in supermarkets, you
are likely to need to make       cider. We made this autumnal dish for Thanksgiving dinner last year, and it
a trip to the butcher shop       took the assembled crowd by storm.
to get this cut at this point.
                                         Serve this with Au Gratin or Roesti Potatoes (page 410), Green Beans
As usual with cuts of this
size, it pays to call several    with Mushrooms and Almonds (page 429), and corn bread.
days ahead to make sure
you can get it.                          11 ⁄ 2 cups dark raisins
                                         1⁄ 2   cup dark rum
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                         F O R T H E S P I C E PA S T E
You can adapt this recipe
to a cured ham if you like.              1 cup packed dark brown sugar
(We suggest that you get a               2 ⁄3   cup fresh sage leaves
bone-in ham, since they
                                         4 teaspoons dry mustard
tend to have more ﬂavor.)
Cured hams don’t really                  4 teaspoons ﬁnely grated lemon zest (yellow part only) (about 2 lemons)
need to be cooked, just                  8 cloves garlic, peeled
warmed up. So instead of                 4 teaspoons kosher salt
browning at 500°F and then
                                         4 teaspoons black peppercorns
roasting for a long time at
300°F, simply rub the ﬂa­
voring paste on the ham,                 One 8- to 10-pound bone-in fresh ham (half a leg), skin on
put it in a 300°F oven, and              1 cup maple syrup
cook until it is heated all              One 1-liter bottle hard apple cider (or substitute regular apple cider)
the way through, about 11 ⁄ 2
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
hours.




326            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.                                               COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

                                                                                  You are likely to have some
     2. In a small bowl, combine the raisins and rum. Set aside to soak           leftovers from this big
while the ham cooks, at least 2 hours.                                            piece of meat, which is
                                                                                  great, because it makes
      3. Make the spice paste: Place all the ingredients in a food processor      incredible sandwiches. The
ﬁtted with a steel blade or in a blender and process until smooth.                possibilities are legion.
                                                                                  Layer it on rye bread with
      4. Using a sharp knife, score the entire surface of the ham in a cross­     Swiss cheese, mustard,
hatch pattern, cutting down just through the skin to the ﬂesh underneath.         and roasted red peppers,
                                                                                  for example, or put thick
(If you are cutting to the right depth, the skin will spread apart a bit as you
                                                                                  slices between pieces of
cut.) Rub the ham all over with the spice paste, pressing it gently into the      whole wheat bread with
crosshatch cuts.                                                                  some mango salsa.

      5. Put the roast on a rack in a roasting pan and roast for 20 minutes.
Reduce the heat to 300°F. After 40 minutes more, begin painting the ham
every 15 minutes or so with the maple syrup. Continue roasting until the
ham is done the way you like it, 2 to 21⁄ 2 hours total cooking time for
medium to medium-well. To check for doneness, insert a meat ther­
mometer into the dead center of the roast and let it sit for 5 seconds, then
read the temperature: 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is medium, 150°F is
medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull it at 147°F.
     6. While the ham is cooking, put the cider in a medium saucepan and
bring to a boil over high heat. Reduce the heat to medium-high and sim­
mer vigorously until reduced by about half, about 20 minutes.
      7. When the ham is done, remove it from the roasting pan, cover it
loosely with foil, and allow it to rest for at least 20 minutes and up to 1
hour.
      8. Tip the roasting pan so you can spoon off all the fat from the pan
juices, then place the pan on the stove over two burners set at medium-
high heat. Add the reduced apple cider and bring to a simmer, scraping the
bottom of the pan to get up the browned bits. Skim any ﬁlm off the sur­
face and season the liquid as needed with salt and pepper. Add the rum-
soaked raisins and stir to combine, then pour into a gravy boat.
     9. Slice the ham into thick slices, drizzle with the cider-raisin sauce,
and serve, passing any remaining sauce separately.




                                                                 PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                327
THE CUT

See Maple-Gazed Fresh
                                Grill-Roasted Rum-Brined Fresh
Ham (page 326) for details
on fresh ham.
                                Ham with Mango Salsa and
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                Grilled Pineapples and Bananas
You can substitute any
                                        S E RVE S 10 TO 12
large pork roast from the
leg or shoulder here.
Boston butt is a good           Here’s one for you outdoor cooking fanatics. We know you all say, “Oh, I’ve
option, for example.            done chickens, I’ve done turkeys, I’ve done legs of lamb, I’ve done beef
                                brisket.” But have you ever done a fresh ham on the grill? We don’t think so.
                                So right now, we challenge you to give it a try.
                                        What we are doing here is grill-roasting, not barbecuing, which means
                                that we’re cooking over a charcoal ﬁre that’s around 350°F, rather than the
                                220°F or so that is used for barbecuing. To help keep the meat moist during
                                the rigors of grill-roasting, we ﬁrst let it soak for at least 24 hours in a brine
                                spiced with rum, nutmeg, and cloves. (This means, of course, that you have to
                                get started at least a day ahead when you want to make this recipe. But if you
                                should forget, you can skip the brine without harming the recipe. By no
                                means fail to make this dish just because you don’t have the time or inclina­
                                tion to brine.)
                                        After brining the ham, we coat it with a West Indies–style rub that will
                                give it a nice dark crust as it cooks. Then we serve it with mango salsa and
                                some grilled bananas and pineapples, which are emblematic of the pork/fruit
                                connection. Long before other meats were combined with fruits, pork was
                                routinely served this way. So here we just add some smokiness to the con­
                                cept.
                                        All in all, this is an outstanding dish. Serve it to your fellow outdoor
                                cooking nuts, and you’re deﬁnitely going to be top dog in the backyard cook­
                                ing sweepstakes.
                                        For your big West Indian feast, serve this with Spicy Latin Black Beans
                                (page 423) and a salad of tomatoes, hearts of palm, avocados, and red
                                onions.

                                        FOR THE BRINE (OPTIONAL)

                                        3 quarts water
                                        1 cup sugar
                                        1 cup kosher salt
                                        3 cups dark rum
                                        25 whole cloves
                                        2 teaspoons ground nutmeg
                                        One 8- to 10-pound bone-in fresh ham (half a leg) with skin



328           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      FOR THE SALSA

      4 ripe mangoes, peeled, pitted, and diced medium
      2 small red onions, peeled and diced small
      1 to 3 tablespoons minced jalapeño or other fresh chile peppers of your
         choice
      1⁄ 2   cup fresh lime juice (about 4 limes)
      1⁄ 2   cup pineapple juice
      1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      FOR THE SPICE RUB
      1⁄ 2   cup of your favorite hot sauce
      2 tablespoons minced garlic
      11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons cumin seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground cumin)
      11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons coriander seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground coriander)
      11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons kosher salt
      11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
      11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons dark brown sugar

      FOR TH E G R I LLE D PI N EAPPLE AN D BANANAS

      8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter
      1⁄ 2   cup packed dark brown sugar
      5 bananas, unpeeled, halved lengthwise
      1 pineapple, unpeeled, halved lengthwise and cut crosswise into half
         moons about 1 ⁄ 2 inch thick
      1 ⁄4   cup vegetable oil

      1. In a bowl, pot, or clean bucket large enough to hold the ham, stir
together the water, sugar, and salt until the sugar and salt completely dis­
solve. Add the rum, cloves, and nutmeg and mix well. Add the ham, mak­
ing sure that it is completely submerged in the liquid; add additional water
if necessary to cover. Allow the ham to brine in the refrigerator for 1 to 3
days, stirring the brine and turning the ham over each day.
      2. Make the salsa: In a medium bowl, combine the mangoes, onions,
jalapeños, lime juice, pineapple juice, cilantro, and salt and pepper and mix
well. Set aside. (This can be made 2 to 3 days ahead of time, covered, and
refrigerated.)
     3. In another medium bowl, combine the ingredients for the spice
rub and mix well. Remove the ham from the brine and pat dry. Rub it all
over with the spice rub, pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
      4. Start a ﬁre well over to one side of a large kettle grill, using about
enough coals to ﬁll a shoe box. When the ﬁre dies down and the coals are
well lit, place the ham on the side away from the coals, being careful that


                                                                   PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   329
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE             none of the meat is directly over the coals. Put the lid on the grill with the
Cut any leftover pork into       vents one quarter of the way open and cook, adding a handful of fresh
thick ham steaks and fry
                                 charcoal about every 30 minutes, until the ham is done the way you like it.
them up for breakfast, with
some sautéed apples and
                                 Start checking for doneness after about 2 hours, but expect that it may
buttered bread.                  take up to 3 hours for a medium to medium-well piece of meat this large.
                                 To check for doneness, insert a meat thermometer into the center of the
                                 roast and let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 126°F is
                                 medium-rare, 134°F is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-
                                 done; we like to pull it at 147°F. When the ham is done, remove it from the
                                 grill, cover it loosely with foil, and allow it to rest for 20 to 30 minutes
                                 before carving.
                                       5. Meanwhile, melt the butter in a small saucepan over medium heat.
                                 Add the brown sugar, stirring to dissolve, then remove from the heat. Rub
                                 the banana halves and pineapple slices lightly with the oil. Place the fruit
                                 cut side down on the grill over a medium ﬁre for 2 to 3 minutes, or until
                                 the bananas are just golden and the pineapple slices have light grill marks.
                                 Flip the fruit over, brush on some of the brown sugar glaze, and grill for 1
                                 minute more. Remove from the grill and drizzle with any leftover glaze.
                                        6. Cut the ham into thick slices and serve, accompanied by the grilled
                                 fruit and mango salsa.




   A BRINE IN ITS TIME
   Brining pork is a good idea. We haven’t included brines in most of the recipes here because we don’t want to
   imply that is an essential step in cooking pork. But if you have the time, then we do encourage you to give
   any large cut of pork a soak. Contrary to popular opinion, bringing is not really about imparting a lot of new
   ﬂavors; if you include spices and other ﬂavoring in a brining solution, those ﬂavors will work their way into
   the meat somewhat, but that’s not really the point. The signiﬁcant action that goes on during brining is the
   penetration of salt and, to a somewhat lesser extent, sugar into the meat as it soaks. When this happens, it
   causes the proteins in the meat to unwind a bit. As they do so, they interlock with each other and form a
   matrix that traps moisture inside the meat. As a result, the meat is juicer and more tender when it is cooked.
   The salt and sugar also enhance the inherent ﬂavors of the pork, just as they would if you sprinkled them on
   the surface. But with brining, they penetrate much further into the meat, deepening on its ﬂavor throughout.
   With today’s lean pork, that’s a very good thing. So if you’ve got the time and the space in your refrigerator,
   go ahead and brine those pork roasts. As a basic brine, we recommend a ratio of 2 quarts water to 1 cup
   kosher salt and 3 ⁄4 cup sugar. An overnight brine is great, but even 4 to 6 hours works. Just be sure that when
   you do brine, you dry the outside of the pork well before you begin searing it.




330           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Cumin-Crusted Grilled Boneless                                                      THE CUT

                                                                                    This is basically the back of

Pork Loin with Grilled Avocados                                                     the pig from the shoulder
                                                                                    to the leg. Since the mus­

and Apple-Chipotle Salsa                                                            cles in this area don’t do
                                                                                    much work, this is a
                                                                                    supremely tender cut. At
      S E RVE S 4 TO 6                                                              the hip (sirloin) and shoul­
                                                                                    der (blade) end it has a
Of all the cuts of all the types of red meat, the center-cut pork loin may be the   little bit of sinew and con­
                                                                                    nective tissue that make
most versatile. Relatively lean, with a tender, ﬁne-grained texture and some        those sections very ﬂavor­
good pork ﬂavor, this is the epitome of the new pork that breeders have             ful, but in the middle it is
worked so hard to produce over the past twenty years or so, and it makes            pure, tender boneless pork.
                                                                                    If you wonder why the pork
one magniﬁcent roast.                                                               people came up with the
      Here we take advantage of this cut’s versatile nature to give it a Latin      advertising slogan, “The
American treatment. Apples and pork are a classic, and we think that tart           Other White Meat . . .” this
                                                                                    cut will give you the
green apples and smoky chipotle chiles are another great pairing, so we             answer.
decided to put the three together. As for the grilled avocados, the idea might
make you blanch, as it did us the ﬁrst time we heard of it, but they are actually   OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

fantastic. The smokiness imparted by the grilling ﬁre matches perfectly with        The bone-in loin blade
                                                                                    roast (from the portion of
the mellow, buttery muskiness of the avocado.
                                                                                    the loin nearest the shoul­
      FOR THE SALSA
                                                                                    der) and bone-in loin sir­
                                                                                    loin roast (the portion of
      2 Granny Smith apples, cored and diced medium
                                                                                    the loin nearest the hip)
      1⁄ 2   red onion, peeled and diced medium                                     would also be very good
      1 to 3 tablespoons minced canned chipotle peppers in adobo, depending         here.
         on your taste for heat
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      1⁄ 3   cup kosher salt
      1⁄ 3   cup freshly cracked black pepper
      1⁄ 2   cup cumin seeds (or 1 ⁄4 cup ground cumin)
      2 tablespoons brown sugar
      One 3-pound boneless center-cut pork top loin roast, external fat trimmed
        to 1 ⁄4 inch

      F O R T H E AV O CA D O S

      4 avocados, halved and pitted
      3 tablespoons olive oil
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




                                                                   PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                  331
                              1. Light a two-level ﬁre in your grill, using about enough charcoal to
                        ﬁll two shoe boxes and tapering the depth of the charcoal in the grill so
                        that two thirds of the coals are on one side and one third on the other.
                             2. Make the salsa: In a medium bowl, combine all the ingredients.
                        Mix well and set aside.
                              3. In a small bowl, combine the salt, pepper, cumin, and brown sugar
                        and mix well. Dry the pork loin with paper towels and rub it all over with
                        this mixture, pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
                              4. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals in the hotter part are
                        medium-hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 2
                        to 3 seconds), place the meat over the hottest part of the ﬁre and cook
                        until well seared, 8 to 10 minutes on each side. Move the pork to the cooler
                        part of the grill, cover it with a disposable aluminum foil roasting pan, and
                        cook until the pork is done the way you like it. To check for doneness,
                        insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast and let it sit
                        for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is
                        medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull it
                        at 147°F. When the meat is done, remove it from the grill, cover it loosely
                        with foil, and let it rest for 10 to 20 minutes.
                              5. While the pork is resting, grill the avocados: Rub the cut side of
                        the avocado halves with the oil and sprinkle generously with salt and pep­
                        per. Place the halves on the hotter side of the grill, cut side down, and
                        cook for 3 to 5 minutes, or until you see grill marks. Remove from the grill
                        and ﬁll the centers of the avocados with the salsa.
                             6. Cut the pork loin into slices about 1 inch thick and serve, accom­
                        panied by the stuffed avocados.



                        Roast Pork Loin with Spicy Hoisin
                        Sauce, “Peking Duck–Style”
                                S E RVE S 6 TO 8



                        This is your basic Asian-marinated pork, which we call “Peking Duck–Style”
                        because the presentation—coating the meat with jazzed-up hoisin sauce and
                        wrapping it up in pancakes—is fashioned after that famously elaborate Chi­
                        nese dish. We like it because it is one of those situations where you pass
                        around the various ingredients and let each person assemble his or her own
                        dinner.


332   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      This dish requires some advance planning, since it involves marinating           THE CUT

the pork overnight. If you forget to do this, though, don’t despair; you can just      In recipes such as this one,
                                                                                       you can use any one of
make the marinade, reduce it on the stove, and baste the pork with it as it
                                                                                       several roasts from the
cooks and right after it comes out of the oven. You’ll lose a little depth of ﬂa­      loin, which is basically the
vor, but the dish will still be wonderful. (You can also serve this without the        upper back of the pig. The
                                                                                       most deluxe option is the
pancakes if you want; just cut the roast into slices about 1 ⁄ 2 inch thick and
                                                                                       boneless top loin roast,
serve with the hoisin sauce on the side. Believe us, the pork still tastes great.)     which is the whole loin
      We might serve this with a dish of egg noodles sprinkled with toasted            (see Cumin-Crusted Grilled
                                                                                       Boneless Pork Loin, page
sesame seeds and minced scallions and ginger.
                                                                                       331, for more details). But
                                                                                       often you will ﬁnd large
      FOR THE MARINADE
                                                                                       enough roasts cut from
      3 tablespoons peanut oil                                                         one of three sections of the
      1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh ginger                                          loin. For the most tender
      2 tablespoons minced garlic                                                      meat with the best texture,
                                                                                       choose a center-cut pork
      1 tablespoon ﬁve-spice powder
                                                                                       loin roast. For a bit more
      1⁄ 2   cup honey                                                                 ﬂavor but a little rougher
      1⁄ 2   cup soy sauce                                                             texture, choose a boneless
      1⁄ 2                                                                             pork loin blade roast, which
             cup dry sherry
                                                                                       is the part of the loin near­
      1⁄ 2   cup rice wine vinegar (or substitute white wine vinegar)                  est the shoulder, or a
      1 cup orange juice                                                               boneless pork loin sirloin
      3 tablespoons crushed Szechwan peppercorns (or substitute freshly                roast, which comes from
         cracked white pepper)                                                         the loin nearest the leg.
                                                                                       Any one of them will be
      2 tablespoons sesame oil
                                                                                       excellent.

      One 4-pound boneless pork loin roast, external fat trimmed to 1 ⁄4 inch          OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
      1⁄ 2   cup hoisin sauce                                                          You can substitute a bone­
      2 tablespoons Asian chile paste (or substitute 1 tablespoon each minced          less pork butt, a shoulder
         fresh chile peppers and minced garlic)                                        roast, or a fresh ham in this
      Mandarin pancakes or ﬂour tortillas                                              recipe.

      F O R T H E G A R N I S H E S ( A S YO U L I K E )

      Thinly sliced scallions
      Pickled ginger
      Cilantro leaves
      Very thinly sliced jalapeño peppers


     1. Make the marinade: In a medium saucepan, heat the oil over
medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the ginger, garlic, and
ﬁve-spice powder and cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Add the remaining
marinade ingredients and bring to a simmer, then turn the heat to low and
simmer gently for 15 minutes. Remove from the heat and allow to cool
almost to room temperature. (If you’re in a hurry, throw in a couple of ice
cubes to speed the cooling.)


                                                                        PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES               333
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE                    2. Place the pork loin in a deep glass dish. Pour the cooled marinade
Leftover pork from this          over, cover it, and refrigerate it overnight, or for up to 3 days, turning sev­
dish makes excellent pork
                                 eral times.
fried rice, and if you have
any of the garnishes left                3. Preheat the oven to 500°F.
over, you can toss them in
there too.                             4. Remove the pork from the marinade and set aside. In a medium
                                 saucepan, bring the marinade to a boil over medium heat, then reduce the
                                 heat and simmer the marinade vigorously until it is thick and syrupy, 30 to
                                 40 minutes. Strain into a bowl and set aside.
                                        5. Place the pork roast on a rack in a medium roasting pan and roast
                                 until well browned, about 20 minutes. Reduce the oven temperature to
                                 300°F and continue to roast, brushing the pork with the reduced marinade
                                 every 15 minutes or so, until the meat is done the way you like it, about 50
                                 minutes to 1 hour more for medium to medium-well. To check for done-
                                 ness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the roast and let it
                                 sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F
                                 is medium, 150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull
                                 it at 147°F. When the pork is done, remove it from the oven, cover it
                                 loosely with foil, and let it rest for 10 to 20 minutes.
                                       6. While the pork is resting, combine the hoisin sauce and chile paste
                                 in a small bowl and mix well.
                                       7. Thinly slice the pork and pass it on a platter along with the spicy
                                 hoisin sauce and mandarin pancakes or ﬂour tortillas so guests can roll up
                                 their own, Peking duck–style. Pass any or all of the garnishes for people to
                                 include.


THE CUT

See Cumin-Crusted Grilled
                                 Roast Pork Loin with
Boneless Pork Loin (page
331) for details on the
                                 Apricot-Sausage Stuffing and
boneless center-cut pork
top loin.                        Rosemary-Garlic Jus
                                         S E RVE S 6



                                 This dish is great in the fall. It has a lot of rich, deep ﬂavors that for some rea­
                                 son seem autumnal to us, and it is exactly the kind of thing you want on the
                                 table when you sense winter just over the horizon. It’s also pretty elegant.
                                         It takes a bit of time to make this recipe, but you don’t have to do any­
                                 thing very complicated. Basically, you take a boneless center-cut pork loin,
                                 cut a large pocket in it, and ﬁll it with a ﬂavorful stufﬁng that includes



334            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
sausage, so that it stays moist during roasting. Then, when the roast is done,
you make a simple pan sauce from the drippings, expanding and deepening
the ﬂavors with rosemary, apricot preserves, and a whole head of roasted
garlic. (Don’t forget, by the way, to put the garlic in the oven with the roast
when you reduce the temperature after the initial browning.)
      If you want, you can make the whole process easier by simply skipping
the brining step. Brining does give the pork a somewhat fuller ﬂavor and a
moister texture, so it’s worth doing if you have the time, but the recipe also
works great without it.
      Serve this with roasted apples and Candied Sweet Potatoes (page
436) or Roasted Winter Squash (page 435).

      FOR THE BRINE (OPTIONAL)

      21 ⁄ 2 quarts water
      2 cups packed dark brown sugar
      1 cup kosher salt
      5 large sprigs fresh rosemary
      10 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed
      3 bay leaves, crumbled

      One 3- to 4-pound boneless center-cut pork top loin roast, external fat
        trimmed to 1 ⁄4 inch

      FOR THE STUFFING

      2 tablespoons olive oil
      1 red onion, peeled and minced
      1⁄ 2   pound Italian pork sausage, casings removed and well crumbled
      1 tablespoon minced garlic
      11 ⁄ 2 cups minced dried apricots
      1 large egg, lightly beaten
      1⁄ 2   cup fresh bread crumbs
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      1 head garlic, top 1 ⁄4 inch sliced off
      2 tablespoons olive oil
      11 ⁄ 2 cups chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      1⁄ 2   cup dry white wine
      1 ⁄4   cup apricot preserves
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh rosemary needles
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. In a large bowl, roasting pan, or bucket large enough to hold the
roast, combine the water, brown sugar, and salt and stir until the sugar and


                                                                    PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   335
                        salt are completely dissolved. Add the remaining brine ingredients and mix
                        well. Add the pork loin, making sure that it is completely submerged in
                        the liquid (if it is not, add more water). Let the roast brine in the refrigera­
                        tor for 24 hours, stirring the brine and turning the meat occasionally.
                              2. Make the stufﬁng: In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-
                        high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and cook, stirring
                        occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the sausage and garlic
                        and continue to cook, stirring occasionally, until the sausage is cooked
                        through, 10 to 12 minutes. Remove from the heat and allow the mixture to
                        cool almost to room temperature, then add the apricots, egg, bread
                        crumbs, and salt and pepper, mixing well to combine. Cover and refriger­
                        ate the stufﬁng until you are ready to cook the pork.
                                3. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

                              4. Remove the pork from the brine and dry it well with paper towels.
                        (Discard the brine.) To cut a pocket for the stufﬁng, make a lengthwise cut
                        halfway through the thickness of the meat. Holding the knife inside the
                        cut, turn the knife parallel to the cutting board and make horizontal cuts
                        to the left and right of the original cut. Fill this cavity with the stufﬁng and
                        close the meat up around it. Tie the roast with twine in several places so it
                        will hold its shape, and sprinkle it generously with salt and pepper.
                              5. Place the roast on a rack in a roasting pan and roast for 20 minutes
                        to brown the outside. Reduce the oven temperature to 300°F and con­
                        tinue roasting until the meat is done the way you like it, 40 to 60 minutes
                        more for medium to medium-well. To check for doneness, insert a meat
                        thermometer into the dead center of the roast and let it sit for 5 seconds,
                        then read the temperature: 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is medium,
                        150°F is medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull it at 147°F.
                               6. Meanwhile, prepare the garlic: Place the whole unpeeled head of
                        garlic in the center of a foot-long sheet of aluminum foil. Pour the olive oil
                        over it, then wrap it up very tightly. When you reduce the oven tempera­
                        ture to 300°F, place the garlic in the oven and cook until the individual gar­
                        lic cloves are soft to the touch, about 1 hour. Allow to cool to room
                        temperature, then squeeze the pulp from the cloves into a bowl. Mash
                        with a wooden spoon until very smooth and set aside.
                              7. When the pork is done, transfer it to a platter and cover it loosely
                        with foil to keep warm while you make the sauce.
                              8. Discard any fat in the roasting pan and place the pan on the stove
                        over two burners at medium-high heat. Add the stock and wine, stirring to
                        dissolve the brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan, and simmer, stir-


336   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
ring occasionally, until the liquid is reduced by half, about 5 minutes. Skim        COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

any scum from the top, then stir in the preserves, the garlic puree, and the         If you have leftovers, try
                                                                                     treating this like a Thanks­
rosemary and season with salt and pepper.
                                                                                     giving situation—make a
      9. Slice the pork into 1 ⁄ 2-inch slices, drizzle with the sauce, and serve,   sandwich with the meat
                                                                                     and the stufﬁng.
passing the remaining sauce on the side.




Ginger-Rubbed Rack of Pork with                                                      THE CUT

                                                                                     We are calling here for a

Chile-Lychee Sambal                                                                  bone-in center rib roast,
                                                                                     which is a very nice cut of
                                                                                     meat indeed. If this were
      S E RVE S 8                                                                    beef, it would be a prime
                                                                                     rib; if it were lamb, it would
Although cooks in Southeast Asia would be much more likely to cut their pork         be rack of lamb. Tender
                                                                                     and full of ﬂavor, it is one of
up for a stir-fry than to make a roast like this, the ﬂavors of that part of the     our favorite cuts. This roast
world are fantastic with pork. Here we coat a deluxe center rib roast with a         can be cut with anywhere
pretty straight-up ginger-spice rub, roast it, and serve it with a sambal featur­    from 5 to 8 ribs, but to
                                                                                     serve this many people, the
ing that familiar tropical combination of hot and sweet. We urge you to make         8-rib rack is what you’ll
the effort to ﬁnd lychees. These small fruits, native to Southeast Asia, have a      need.
hard red shell and a single seed. Their ﬂesh has a smooth, almost slippery
texture and a juicy sweetness that works really well in the sambal.                  OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

                                                                                     Any of the bone-in loin
      Serve this with Basic Fried Rice (page 420) and some green beans or
                                                                                     roasts, including the loin
broccoli seasoned with soy sauce.                                                    blade roast (from the por­
                                                                                     tion of the loin nearest the
      1⁄ 3   cup minced fresh ginger                                                 shoulder) and the loin sir­
      1⁄ 3   cup minced garlic                                                       loin roast (the portion of
      1⁄ 2                                                                           the loin nearest the hip),
             cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
                                                                                     would also be good here.
      1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh mint                                          Be aware, though, that a
      2 tablespoons kosher salt                                                      bone-in blade roast is
      2 tablespoons freshly cracked white pepper (or substitute black pepper)        going to be pretty difﬁcult
                                                                                     to carve, since it has both
      One 5- to 6-pound bone-in pork loin center rib roast
                                                                                     the blade bone and the rib
                                                                                     bones in it.
      FOR TH E SAM BAL

      One 12-ounce can lychees, diced small, with 1 ⁄ 2 cup of their juice
      1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
      1 ⁄4   cup Vietnamese chile-garlic paste
      5 scallions (white and green parts), thinly sliced
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste



                                                                      PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                 337
                                1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

                              2. In a small bowl, combine the ginger, garlic, cilantro, mint, salt, and
                        pepper and mix well. Dry the pork with paper towels and rub it all over
                        with the spice mixture, pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
                               3. Place the pork on a rack in a roasting pan and roast for 20 minutes
                        to brown. Reduce the oven temperature to 300°F and continue to cook
                        until the pork is done to your liking, 1 hour to 1 hour and 10 minutes more
                        for medium to medium-well. To check for doneness, insert a meat ther­
                        mometer into the dead center of the roast and let it sit for 5 seconds, then
                        read the temperature: 126°F is medium-rare, 134°F is medium, 150°F is
                        medium-well, and 160°F is well-done; we like to pull it at 147°F. Remove
                        from the oven, cover loosely with foil, and allow to rest for 20 minutes
                        before carving into individual chops.
                             4. Meanwhile, make the sambal: In a small bowl, combine the
                        lychees and the reserved juice, the lime juice, chile paste, and scallions and
                        mix well. Season with salt and pepper.
                                5. Serve the pork chops with the sambal.




338   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Roast Sage-Garlic Pork Butt with                                                        THE CUT

                                                                                        We are calling for a bone­

Roasted Pineapple and Onions and                                                        less pork butt roast here.
                                                                                        This is one of the great

Sweet Mustard Sauce                                                                     misnomers of all time: The
                                                                                        pork butt is not from the
                                                                                        butt of the animal at all, but
      S E RVE S 6 TO 8                                                                  from the shoulder. (It got
                                                                                        its name because in colo­
Pork butt is one of those cuts of meat that to our mind has not received its proper     nial times this type of pork
                                                                                        cut was packed into barrels
due. It is inexpensive and easy to cook, and it has great ﬂavor, but many people        called “butts” for shipping
regard it as somehow a low-class piece of meat. No doubt this is because it con­        or storage.) Basically, this
tains a lot of sinews and intramuscular fat, but if you cook it properly, it is quite   is to pork what the chuck is
                                                                                        to beef. Just like beef
tender, and the fat helps keep it from drying out even if you have guests who           chuck, it has a lot of con­
insist that their pork be overcooked. The butt is very often braised, which is a ﬁne    nective tissue, fat, and
treatment, but it is also just tender enough to be roasted, as we do here.              sinew, all of which make it
                                                                                        quite tough, but also give it
      In this treatment, we rub the pork butt with garlic and fresh sage and            wonderful ﬂavor. This is a
pair it with the pineapple that always seemed to accompany pork not only in             supermarket cut, and it is
Polynesian restaurants but also on our family’s dinner tables. Instead of just          some very cost-effective
                                                                                        good eating. If you are
cubing the fruit and sticking it on top of the ﬁnished roast, though, we add it         making dinner for a smaller
to the roasting pan with some red onions after the meat has browned so their            group, you can often ﬁnd
ﬂavors can mingle during the long low-heat roasting. Then, to add some ﬂavor            half butts, which weigh 3 to
                                                                                        4 pounds.
and character to the simple pan sauce, we stir in some grainy mustard,
another classic pork match-up, at the end.                                              OTHER NAMES
      By the way, if you can’t ﬁnd a good pineapple in the market, you can              Because this method of
substitute three good-sized mangoes or six or seven peaches. In either of               cutting the shoulder origi­
                                                                                        nated in colonial times in
those cases, use orange juice in place of the pineapple juice.
                                                                                        Boston, this cut has lots of
      You might serve this with Roasted Winter Squash (page 435) or                     city-speciﬁc nicknames,
Roasted Carrots (page 435), dinner rolls, and classic stewed greens.                    including Boston butt roast,
                                                                                        boneless Boston shoulder,
      3 tablespoons minced garlic                                                       and boneless shoulder
                                                                                        blade Boston roast.
      3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh sage
      3 tablespoons kosher salt
      3 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
      One 5- to 6-pound boneless pork butt roast
      1 small pineapple, peeled, cored, and cut into 2-inch chunks
      3 red onions, peeled and quartered

      F OR TH E SAU CE

      2 cups pineapple juice
      1 ⁄4   cup red wine vinegar
      1⁄ 2   cup grainy mustard
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




                                                                      PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                   339
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                  1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.
Any boneless roast from
the pork shoulder will work           2. In a small bowl, combine the garlic, sage, salt, and pepper and mix
just ﬁne here. Avoid shoul­     well. Dry the pork butt with paper towels. With the tip of a sharp knife,
der cuts with the word “pic­    make 10 to 12 small cuts, about 1⁄ 2 inch long and 1⁄ 2 inch deep, evenly spaced
nic” in them for this
                                over the surface of the pork and push some of the spice rub into each slit.
treatment, though. They are
actually from the arm and       (If you have any left over, rub it over the surface of the pork.)
foreleg of the pig rather
than the shoulder, and are
                                      3. Place the pork on a rack in a roasting pan and roast for 20 minutes
too tough for roasting.         to brown it. Reduce the oven temperature to 300°F, add the pineapple and
Another good substitute is      onions to the roasting pan, and continue to cook until the pork is done to
a half fresh ham, from the      your liking, 1 hour to 1 hour and 10 minutes more for medium-well. To
hind leg of the pig.
                                check for doneness, insert a meat thermometer into the dead center of the
                                roast and let it sit for 5 seconds, then read the temperature: 126°F is
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

If you have leftovers from
                                medium-rare, 134°F is medium, 150° is medium-well, and 160°F is well-
this, you can chop up the       done; we like to pull it at 147°F. When the roast is done, remove it from
meat into small cubes and       the pan, along with the pineapple and onions, loosely cover with foil, and
make yourself some barbe­       allow the meat to rest for about 20 minutes while you make the sauce.
cue-style sandwiches on
crusty rolls.                         4. Pour off the fat from the roasting pan and place the pan on the
                                stove over two burners at medium-high heat. Add the pineapple juice and
                                vinegar and bring to a simmer, stirring to dissolve the brown crusty stuff
                                in the bottom of the pan. Continue to simmer until the liquid is reduced
                                by half, about 5 to 7 minutes. Stir in the mustard, season with salt and pep­
                                per, and pour into a sauce boat.
                                      5. Slice the pork roast and serve with the pineapple and onions, pass­
                                ing the sauce separately.




340           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                    RECIPES FOR
       LARGE TOUGH CUTS OF PORK

  Soy-Braised, Hoisin-Glazed Pork Shoulder with Sesame-   10 STEPS TO GREAT BRAISED
                                                          PORK
                                  Ginger Dipping Sauce
                                                           1. Dry the meat.
 Red Wine–Braised Pork Steaks with Peaches, Cinnamon,
                                                           2. Season the meat well.
                                          and Couscous
                                                           3. Sear the meat hard.
  Traditional Dry-Rubbed St. Louis–Style Pork Spareribs
                                                           4. Remove the meat from
                                                              the pot, adjust the
          EZ–Style Adobo Pork Ribs with Molasses-Chile
                                                              amount of fat in the
                                        Barbecue Sauce        pot, and sauté the
                                                              aromatics and
Authentic Eastern North Carolina Barbecued Pork Butt on       vegetables.
                              Buns with Tidewater Slaw
                                                           5. Deglaze the pot with
                                                              some of the liquid.
                   Cheater-Style Indoor Barbecued Pork
                                                           6. Return the meat to the
                                                              pot along with enough
                                                              liquid to cover it about
                                                              halfway.

                                                           7. Bring to a simmer, skim
                                                              the ﬁlm, cover the pot,
                                                              and place in a 300°F
                                                              oven.

                                                           8. Check for doneness
                                                              early and often: Look
                                                              for “fork-tender.”

                                                           9. Skim the fat and any
                                                              ﬁlm from the liquid and,
                                                              if you want, remove the
                                                              meat and reduce the
                                                              liquid; season to taste.

                                                          10. Carve the meat and
                                                              serve with the braising
                                                              liquid on the side.




                                                                                   341
THE CUT

See Roast Sage-Garlic
                                 Soy-Braised, Hoisin-Glazed
Pork Butt (page 339) for
details about pork shoul­
                                 Pork Shoulder Roast with
der roast, also known as
pork butt roast.                 Sesame-Ginger Dipping Sauce
                                         S E RVE S 6
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Any boneless pork shoul­
der roast will work just ﬁne     Pork is the meat of choice in China, and in fact throughout most of non-
here. Since we are braising,     Muslim Asia. And while many American cooks tend to think of braising as a
you can use not only the
                                 French, or at least European, cooking technique, it is very popular in Asia as
Boston butt-style or shoul­
der blade roasts, but also       well. Because pork shoulder is ideal for braising, this cut is a favorite in that
the tougher cuts from the        part of the world. The rich, somewhat fatty meat is a perfect match for strong
picnic shoulder, which are
                                 Asian ﬂavors such as hoisin and soy sauce, both of which are central ingredi­
actually from the arm and
foreleg. Cuts like fresh pic­    ents in this dish.
nic shoulder or pork shoul­              Be sure that you brown the meat well here, since that will add a won­
der arm roast are incredibly
                                 derful, slightly caramelized ﬂavor to the ﬁnal roast.
cheap and can be very
tasty when cooked this                   Serve this with plenty of rice and some quick-sautéed eggplant or
way. You could also substi­      some mild mustard greens prepared in the manner of quick-sautéed Broccoli
tute a half fresh ham from
                                 Rabe with Garlic and Oil (page 430).
the hind leg of the pig.

                                         3 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
                                         One 4-pound boneless Boston butt or picnic shoulder
                                         3 tablespoons freshly cracked white pepper (or substitute black), or more
                                            to taste
                                         Kosher salt to taste
                                         2 large red onions, peeled and thinly sliced
                                         1 ⁄4   cup minced garlic
                                         1 ⁄4   cup minced fresh ginger
                                         1 tablespoon minced fresh chile peppers of your choice
                                         1⁄ 2   cup soy sauce
                                         1⁄ 2   cup rice wine vinegar or white vinegar
                                         1 cup white wine

                                         F OR TH E D I PPI N G SAU CE
                                         1 ⁄4   cup sesame oil
                                         3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                         3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
                                         1 teaspoon honey (or substitute sugar)
                                         6 dashes Tabasco sauce


                                         1⁄ 2   cup hoisin sauce
                                         1 bunch scallions (white and green parts), thinly sliced



342            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Preheat the oven to 300°F.                                               COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

                                                                                  Shred any leftover pork,
      2. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large ovenproof pot with a          removing as much fat as
lid, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking.           possible in the process,
Dry the meat with paper towels, rub it all over with the white pepper,            heat it up with a bit of the
                                                                                  braising liquid, and make
sprinkle it generously with salt, and brown well on all sides, 8 to 10 min­
                                                                                  some awesome Chinese-
utes per side. Remove the meat from the pot and set aside.                        style shredded pork sand­
                                                                                  wiches.
      3. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions and cook, stirring occa­
sionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic, ginger, and chiles
and cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Add the soy sauce, vinegar, and wine and
bring to a simmer, stirring to scrape up any browned bits in the bottom of
the pot.
      4. Return the pork to the pot. (The liquid should come about
halfway up the sides of the pork; if it does not, add some water.) Bring the
liquid to a simmer and skim any ﬁlm from the top, then cover, place in the
oven, and cook until the meat is tender, 2 to 21⁄ 2 hours. To check for done-
ness, plunge a fork straight down into the meat and try to pull the fork out.
If the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the
fork, give it more time. When the meat is done, remove it from the liquid,
cover it loosely with foil, and set it aside.
      5. Taste the braising liquid, and if it needs more ﬂavor, place the pot
on the stove over medium-high heat and simmer to reduce the liquid. For
a thicker sauce, reduce it until it coats the back of a spoon. Adjust the sea­
soning as needed.
       6. Meanwhile, make the dipping sauce: Combine the sesame oil, gin­
ger, lemon juice, honey, and Tabasco in a small bowl and mix well.
      7. Cut the pork into thick slices, brush them generously with the
hoisin sauce, sprinkle with the scallions, and serve, passing the dipping
sauce and braising liquid on the side.




                                                                 PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                  343
THE CUT

Although the formal title of
                                 Red Wine–Braised Pork Steaks
this cut is the pork shoul­
der blade steak, it is famil­
                                 with Peaches, Cinnamon, and
iarly known as a shoulder
chop, blade steak, or            Couscous
sometimes simply a pork
steak. It is basically the               S E RVE S 4

same cut as the 7-bone pot
roast of beef and has simi­      North African ﬂavors predominate in this dish, which is rather simple to make
lar attributes: excellent ﬂa­
vor and better texture than
                                 but delivers complex layers of taste. We particularly like the peaches, which
many other cuts from the         give the braising liquid a nice sweetness. Although the addition of butter to
front of the animal. It          the braising liquid at the very end creates a pleasant texture, it is by no means
becomes quite tender
when cooked with long,
                                 essential. Feel free to leave it out if you wish.
slow moist heat as it is                 Since this dish already has its own starch in the form of ﬂavored cous­
here. You see this cut both      cous, all it needs to make a terriﬁc meal is grilled pita bread and a salad of
bone-in and boneless. We
have a slight preference for
                                 Romaine lettuce, tomato, red onion, and feta cheese.
the bone-in version simply
because bones give meat                  2 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
more ﬂavor, but either will              Four 10- to 12-ounce bone-in pork shoulder blade steaks, about 1 inch
work perfectly well in this                thick
recipe.                                  Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         1 red onion, peeled and diced small
OTHER NAMES
                                         4 ripe peaches, peeled, pitted, and sliced into eighths
Pork blade steak, pork
                                         About 1 cup chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
7-rib steak, pork shoulder
chop.                                    1 cup dry red wine
                                         1⁄ 2   teaspoon ground cinnamon
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE                   1 bay leaf
In this recipe, you can sub­             Pinch of dried thyme
stitute a pork shoulder arm
steak, also known as pork                FOR THE COUSCOUS
arm chop or pork picnic                  4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter
steak. This cut comes from
                                         1 large onion, peeled and diced small
the arm or foreleg of the
hog and is a bit tougher                 1 teaspoon minced garlic
than the shoulder steak,                 13 ⁄4 cups instant couscous (about 1 box)
with more connective tis­
                                         21 ⁄4 cups boiling water
sue and fat, but it will work
ﬁne with the long, slow                  2 teaspoons kosher salt
cooking called for here.                 1 teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes, or less to taste
You could even use a                     2 tablespoons fresh thyme leaves (or 1 tablespoon dried thyme)
Boston butt roast here, but
you will need to increase
the amount of liquid and                 2 tablespoons grainy mustard
approximately double the                 2 tablespoons unsalted butter, cut into 8 pieces
cooking time.




344            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. In a very large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-high heat until      BUTCHERSPEAK

very hot but not smoking. Dry the steaks with paper towels and sprinkle           This is a bit of an unusual
                                                                                  cut nowadays, since this
them generously with salt and pepper. Add them to the pan in a single
                                                                                  section of the hog is most
layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and cook until well             often left intact as a Boston
browned on both sides, 8 to 10 minutes; remove the steaks to a platter as         butt. But any good butcher
they are done.                                                                    should know what you are
                                                                                  talking about if you ask for
      2. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pan as needed so you have a total     the cut by its formal name,
of about 2 tablespoons in the pan. Add the onion and sauté, stirring occa­        the shoulder blade steak.
                                                                                  If you just ask for a blade
sionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the peaches and sauté, stir­
                                                                                  steak, he might confuse
ring frequently, until they start to brown, about 5 minutes more. Add the         it with the blade chop from
chicken stock and wine and bring to a simmer, stirring to dissolve the            the loin, which is a similar
brown crusty stuff in the bottom of the pan.                                      cut but works better when
                                                                                  cooked by dry heat methods.
      3. Return the steaks to the pan and add the cinnamon, bay leaf, and
thyme. (The liquid should come halfway up the sides of the meat; if it
does not, add more stock or water.) Skim any scum from the liquid, then
reduce the heat to low and simmer, partially covered, until the steaks are
tender, about 1 hour. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down
into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the
meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
      4. While the steaks are braising, make the couscous: In a medium
saucepan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the onion and cook, stir­
ring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic and
cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Add the couscous and stir until it is well
coated with butter, about 1 minute more. Add the boiling water and salt,
remove the pan from the heat, cover, and let the couscous stand until all
the liquid is absorbed, about 15 minutes.
       5. When the steaks are tender, transfer them to a serving platter and
cover them loosely with foil to keep warm. Skim the ﬁlm from the cook­
ing liquid and taste it. If it needs more ﬂavor, place the pan over medium-
high heat and simmer to reduce the liquid. When the liquid is slightly less
thick than you want it, stir in the mustard, then swirl in the butter, a little
at a time, until the sauce is shiny and thick. Remove from the heat and sea­
son with salt and pepper.
     6. Transfer the couscous to a large serving bowl and add the red pep­
per ﬂakes and thyme, ﬂufﬁng with a fork to break up any lumps.
     7. Top the steaks with sauce and serve, passing the couscous and any
remaining sauce on the side.




                                                                 PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                 345
THE CUT

Spareribs are long narrow
                                 Traditional Dry-Rubbed
pieces of meat and bone
that come from the lower
                                 St. Louis–Style Pork Spareribs
part of the hog’s ribs and
breastbone. “St. Louis–                  S E RVE S 8

style” refers to a slab of
ribs that has had the            Many people, when they grill ribs, use baby back ribs. But to me (Chris),
breastbone removed,
                                 those are not really ribs. Real ribs, also known as spareribs, come from the
which makes more uniform
and more maneuverable on         belly of the animal, right underneath the bacon. These ribs are not really all
the grill.                       that tender, so they need some time on the grill, but when they come off, they
                                 have an amazing ﬂavor.
OTHER NAMES
                                         The key is that you are cooking with indirect heat, so it’s important to
Pork spareribs, breastbone
off.                             make sure that no part of the meat is directly over the coals. If it is, the fat
                                 dripping down off the ribs will cause the kind of ﬁre you don’t want. We’re
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           calling for four 2-pound racks of ribs here, so you need a big grill to keep the
You can substitute the           ribs away from the ﬂames. Or you can, of course, cut the racks in half and
smaller pork back ribs
                                 cook a series of smaller racks.
(which come from the loin
of the hog), but if you do,              Rather than slather the ribs with a tomato-based sauce, here we serve
you’ll want to cut the cook­     them “dry,” accompanied by a vinegar-based sauce for drizzling on or dipping
ing time roughly in half.
                                 into. That gives the spice rub, which becomes a beautiful dark brown during
                                 cooking, a chance to shine.
                                         This is your classic barbecue preparation, so serve the ribs with any or
                                 all of the following: coleslaw, baked beans, corn bread, watermelon, sweet
                                 potato salad, and sweet iced tea.

                                         FOR THE RUB
                                         1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt
                                         1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper
                                         1 ⁄4   cup chile powder
                                         1 ⁄4   cup ground cumin
                                         1⁄ 2   cup sugar
                                         1⁄ 2   cup paprika


                                         Four 2-pound racks St. Louis–style pork spareribs

                                         F OR TH E SAU CE
                                         1⁄ 2   cup white vinegar
                                         2 tablespoons Tabasco sauce
                                         2 tablespoons sugar
                                         1 tablespoon kosher salt
                                         1 tablespoon freshly cracked black pepper




346            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Start a ﬁre well over to one side using about enough charcoal to ﬁll      COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

half a shoe box in a large kettle grill.                                           When you reheat leftover
                                                                                   ribs, it is important that you
      2. In a medium bowl, combine the rub ingredients and mix well. Dry           bring them back the same
the ribs with paper towels, then rub them thoroughly on all sides with this        way they were cooked—
                                                                                   slow and low. So reheat
mixture, pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
                                                                                   these babies in a 225°F
                                                                                   oven, and they will be
         3.   In a small bowl, combine the sauce ingredients and mix well. Set
                                                                                   almost as delicious as
aside.                                                                             when they ﬁrst came off
                                                                                   the grill.
      4. When the coals are well lit, place the meat on the side away from
the coals, being careful that none of it is directly over the coals. Put the lid
on the grill with the vents open one quarter of the way. Cook for 3 to 4
hours, adding a handful of fresh charcoal about every 30 minutes, until the
juice runs clear when you poke the meat with a fork and the meat is tender
and pulls easily from the bone.
     5. Remove the ribs from the grill and cut them apart between the
bones. Serve the ribs “dry,” with the sauce on the side.




                                                                  PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                  347
THE CUT

In the trade, these are
                                EZ–Style Adobo Pork Ribs with
called “3 and down” pork
spareribs. The “3 and
                                Molasses-Chile Barbecue Sauce
down” means that each
rack weighs 3 pounds or                 S E RVE S 5

less, and the “spareribs”
means that they come from       The “3 and down” spareribs used in this recipe are my (Chris’s) absolute
the belly of the hog, right
                                favorite type of ribs. These beauties are small enough to be manageable, but
below the bacon. If you can
get them, these are my #1       they have plenty of fat and incredible pork ﬂavor. It just doesn’t get any better
choice for ribs.                than this in the rib department.
                                        Here I’m taking a kind of nontraditional approach to these ribs. First I
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                coat them with my dry adaptation of the Latin American adobo sauce, ﬂa­
You can deﬁnitely use St.
Louis–style spareribs here,     vored with cumin, chili, oregano, and sour orange. Next I go the “cheater’s
and, in a pinch, you could      route,” putting the ribs in a low oven for 3 hours to cook them through, then
cut your cooking times in       laying them on the grill over a very low charcoal ﬁre to give them a nice crust
half and go with the pork
loin back ribs, even though     and some good smoke ﬂavor. To ﬁnish it all off, there’s a sweet-sour-hot bar­
they’re really a different      becue sauce for drizzling or dunking.
animal.                                 These hyper-ﬂavorful ribs go great with Latin-Style Black Beans and
                                Rice (page 422) and a Costa Rican–style salad of cabbage, avocados, red
                                bell peppers, and pineapple.

                                        F O R T H E F L AV O R I N G PA S T E

                                        2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                        2 tablespoons ground cumin
                                        2 tablespoons chile powder
                                        2 tablespoons dark brown sugar
                                        3 tablespoons kosher salt
                                        3 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh oregano
                                        1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
                                        6 tablespoons orange juice
                                        2 tablespoons fresh lime juice (about 1 lime)
                                        4 dashes Tabasco sauce
                                        2 tablespoons olive oil


                                        Two 3-pound racks pork spareribs

                                        F OR TH E SAU CE
                                        1⁄ 3   cup molasses
                                        1⁄ 2   cup catsup
                                        1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
                                        2 tablespoons ground cumin




348           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro                                     COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

     1 to 3 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice                  If you are fortunate enough
                                                                                   to have any of these ribs
                                                                                   left over, reheat them in a
     1. Preheat the oven to 200°F.                                                 low (250°F) oven and eat
                                                                                   them with coleslaw. Or you
      2. In a food processor or blender, combine the paste ingredients and
                                                                                   can even just eat them
blend until smooth. Dry the ribs with paper towels, then rub them thor­            room temp—we certainly
oughly with the paste. Place the ribs on two baking sheets and slow-roast          have.
for 3 hours, or until red juice comes out when you poke the meat with a
fork and the meat is tender and pulls easily from the bone. Remove the ribs
from the oven. They can go right onto the grill, stand out for a while, or be
refrigerated, covered, for 2 days.
      3. While the ribs are roasting, combine the sauce ingredients in a
small bowl and mix well; set aside.
      4. Light a ﬁre in your grill. You want a very low charcoal ﬁre with the
rack set as high as possible.
      5. Put the ribs on the grill and let them stay there as long as your
patience allows. A light crust on the outside is the goal, and, depending on
your ﬁre, it can be achieved in 5 minutes per side or take up to 30 minutes
per side, if you’re into prolonging your guests’ agony. Of course, the
longer the ribs cook, the better. Brush them with the sauce during the last
minute on the grill.
     6. Cut the ribs apart between the bones and serve with the remaining
barbecue sauce on the side.




                                                                    PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES              349
THE CUT

See Roast Sage-Garlic
                                Authentic Eastern North Carolina
Pork Butt (page 339) for
details about pork butt,
                                Barbecued Pork Butt on Buns with
also known as pork shoul­
der roast or Boston butt.       Tidewater Slaw
                                        MAKE S ABOUT 15 SAN DWICH E S
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Any of the roasts from the
pork shoulder are ﬁne           This is the classic, the original item, real honest-to-goodness pulled pork bar­
here, although those with       becue. You’ve got to have your patience working in order to make this dish,
the word “picnic” in their
                                with plenty of beer on hand and plenty of trash talk to make the long hours
name may be a little tough.
                                around the smoky ﬁre pass more pleasantly.
                                        For you short-cutters out there, another way to do this is to cook the
                                pork butt for 4 to 8 hours in your covered grill with heavy smoke. (This is a
                                place where the wood chips you see in all those grilling catalogues might
                                actually come in handy.) Then you can take the meat out of the grill and put it
                                in a 200°F oven to cook until it is tender. It will take almost as long, but you
                                won’t have to stand around and feed the ﬁre the whole time—and while we
                                think that’s the whole point of the enterprise, we do understand that there are
                                others who actually have more pressing things to do with their time.
                                        These days, you see lots of recipes for this dish that tell you to cook the
                                pork to a particular temperature, but that doesn’t make sense to us. What you
                                really want to do here is cook the meat past the point of mere doneness to
                                the point of tenderness. That can only be determined by checking the texture,
                                not the temperature.
                                        Serve this with some other barbecue classics: watermelon, corn on the
                                cob, potato salad, and banana cream pie.

                                        FOR THE RUB
                                        1 ⁄4   cup kosher salt
                                        1 ⁄4   cup freshly cracked black pepper
                                        1 ⁄4   cup paprika
                                        2 tablespoons granulated sugar
                                        2 tablespoons brown sugar
                                        2 tablespoons ground cumin
                                        2 tablespoons chile powder
                                        1 tablespoon cayenne pepper

                                        Two 4- to 5-pound boneless pork butts

                                        F OR TH E SAU CE

                                        1 cup white vinegar
                                        1 cup cider vinegar



350           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1 tablespoon sugar                                                         COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

     1 tablespoon red pepper ﬂakes                                              Pulled pork barbecue is
                                                                                among the most durable
     1 tablespoon Tabasco sauce
                                                                                dishes out there. You can
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                      reheat it over and over, or
                                                                                you can freeze it and thaw
     F OR TH E S LAW
                                                                                it, and it will still taste
     11 ⁄ 2 cups mayonnaise                                                     great. It’s the ideal thing to
     1⁄ 2   cup white vinegar                                                   have in your freezer in case
     1⁄ 3   cup sugar                                                           folks unexpectedly decide
                                                                                to come for the weekend
     1 tablespoon celery seeds
                                                                                and you want to feed them
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                      some real down-home
     1 head green cabbage, cored and ﬁnely shredded                             food. Just make sure you
                                                                                have plenty of sauce on
     2 carrots, peeled and grated
                                                                                hand too.

     Cheap ﬂuffy white buns
     Hot sauce for garnish


    1. Light a ﬁre well over to one side of a large kettle grill, using about
enough charcoal to ﬁll half of a shoe box.
      2. In a small bowl, combine the rub ingredients and mix well. Dry
the pork butts with paper towels, then rub them on all sides with the rub,
pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
      3. In another small bowl, combine the sauce ingredients and mix
well. Set aside.
      4. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are covered with ash,
place the meat on the side away from the coals, being careful that none of
the meat is directly over the coals. Put the lid on the grill with the vents
open one quarter of the way. Cook for 12 to 14 hours, adding a handful of
fresh charcoal about every 30 minutes, until the meat is super-tender.
      5. While the pork is on the grill, make the coleslaw: In a small bowl,
combine the mayonnaise, vinegar, sugar, celery seeds, and salt and pepper,
and mix well. In a large bowl, combine the cabbage and carrots. Pour the
dressing over the mixture and blend well. Cover and refrigerate until serv­
ing time.
     6. Remove the pork butts from the grill and chop or shred them,
whichever you prefer. Mix the pork with the sauce to taste, and pile it onto
the buns, top with the slaw, and garnish with hot sauce.




                                                               PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                  351
THE CUT

See Roast Sage-Garlic
                                Cheater-Style Indoor
Pork Butt (page 339) for
details about pork butt,
                                Barbecued Pork
also known as pork shoul­
der roast or Boston butt.               S E R V E S 8 H U N G RY P E O P L E



OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE          One of the primary disadvantages of living in a cold climate is that it’s hard to
Any of the roasts from the      barbecue when snow is piled high on the ground. So we have worked very
pork shoulder would work        hard to come up with a solution for all of our climate-impaired barbecue
well here, although those
with the word “picnic” in       brethren, and this is it.
their name may be a little              While it is rank heresy to even suggest this among true aﬁcionados, it is
tough.                          possible to approximate the taste of real barbecue in the oven. Notice that we
                                said approximate, because of course you can’t duplicate the exact ﬂavor of
                                meat that has spent 10 or 12 hours sitting over the smoky heat of a smolder­
                                ing hickory ﬁre. But you can produce a very reasonable, mighty tasty facsimile.
                                        There is, of course, a trick to it. While the oven can hold a steady, even
                                heat for as long as you want it to, it cannot provide the dominant ﬂavor of
                                smoke that is an essential part of barbecue. To mimic that, you have to add a
                                nontraditional step to the barbecuing process, a precooking dunk in brine ﬂa­
                                vored with liquid smoke. Because this requires some setup and some soak­
                                ing time, it is not really quick barbecue, but it is easy barbecue that can be
                                done at any time of year.
                                        Some cooks may balk at using liquid smoke, suspecting that, like many
                                potions designed to mimic ﬂavors, it is a witches’ brew of chemicals and
                                additives. Not so. In fact, it is made simply by burning hickory wood, con­
                                densing the resulting smoke, and ﬁltering it to remove impurities. So you can
                                use it without fear for your health, even though it may cause you to fear for
                                your barbecue credentials.
                                        Since the amount of brine required depends on the size and shape of
                                the container being used for the brining process, it may not always be nec­
                                essary to make the full amount of brine called for below. As with most unfa­
                                miliar dishes, you will have to go by trial and error the ﬁrst time, but after that,
                                you will know what you need before you begin.

                                        FOR THE BRINE

                                        1 gallon water
                                        1⁄ 2   cup liquid smoke
                                        11 ⁄ 2 cups kosher salt
                                        3 ⁄4   cup dark brown sugar


                                        One 5-pound boneless pork butt roast




352           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      FOR THE SPICE RUB
      1 ⁄4   cup granulated sugar
      1 ⁄4   cup paprika
      2 tablespoons ground cumin
      1 tablespoon kosher salt
      2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
      2 tablespoons chile powder

      3 ⁄4   cup white vinegar
      3 to 4 tablespoons Texas Pete, Tabasco, or other hot sauce
      1 tablespoon granulated sugar
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. In a large bucket or other container that the pork butt will easily ﬁt
into, combine the water, liquid smoke, salt, and brown sugar and stir to
dissolve the salt and sugar. Place the pork butt in the container, making
sure there is enough brine so the butt is completely covered. Refrigerate
for 24 to 48 hours, turning every 12 hours or so.
      2. Make the spice rub: In a small bowl, combine the granulated
sugar, paprika, cumin, salt, pepper, and chile powder and mix well.
      3. Preheat the oven to 210°F.

      4. Remove the pork from the brine, dry it well, and rub it all over with
the spice mixture, pressing gently to be sure it adheres. Put the pork butt in
a roasting pan, place in the oven, and cook for 10 to 12 hours, or until the
pork is so tender that it will not grip a fork when you try to lift it.
      5. Just before the pork is done, combine the vinegar, hot sauce, gran­
ulated sugar, and salt and pepper in a small bowl and mix well.
     6. Remove the pork from the oven and, as soon as it is cool enough to
handle, drain off the fat, then chop or shred the pork into bite-sized pieces.
Add the vinegar mixture, mix well, and serve.




                                                                   PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   353
                                 RECIPES FOR
                                 SMALL TENDER CUTS OF PORK

10 STEPS TO GREAT GRILLED        Grilled Coriander-Crusted, Pickled Corn–Stuffed Double-
PORK
                                 Thick Pork Chops with Peach Chutney
 1. Build a two-level ﬁre
    using hardwood               Panfried Brined Loin Chops Stuffed with Walnuts and Stilton
    charcoal.
                                 Cheese, with Spiced Apples
 2. Wait for the ﬂames to
    die down and the coals       Macadamia Nut–Crusted Pork Chops with Pineapple-Ginger
    to be covered with           Catsup
    gray ash.
                                 White Pepper–Crusted Pork Loin Chops with Peanut-Ginger
 3. Check the temperature
    of the ﬁre.                  Power Pack

 4. Dry the meat well.           Sautéed Pork Cutlets with Cashew Slaw and Chile Flavor
 5. Season the meat well.        Booster

 6. Sear the meat hard           Grilled Pork Loin Fillets on Latin-Style Salad with Sour
    over a hot ﬁre.
                                 Orange–Oregano Dressing
 7. Move the meat to the
    cooler part of the ﬁre if    Sautéed Pork Scallopini over Scallion Lo Mein with Soy-Braised
    it needs to cook more        Bok Choy
    slowly (don’t use the
    cover).                      Grilled Boneless Pork Loin Chops with Green Olive–Red Onion
 8. Flip the meat only once      Relish and Nectarine Chutney
    during cooking.
                                 Hoisin-Glazed Grilled Pork Blade Chops with Spicy Korean
 9. Check for doneness
                                 Vegetables
    early and often (nick,
    peek, and cheat).
                                 Grilled Thin Pork Chops with Avocado-Corn Salsa
10. Remove the meat from
    the heat, cover with foil    Molasses-Glazed Pork Tenderloin with Seared Sweet-and-Sour
    and allow to rest for 10     Red Onions and Sage-Date Power Pack
    minutes, then serve
    it up.                       Grilled Pork Tenderloin on a Salad of Grilled Potatoes and
                                 Red Onions

                                 Grilled Baby Back Ribs, Buffalo-Style




354            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
   Grilled Pork, Bacon, and Mango Skewers with     10 STEPS TO GREAT SAUTÉED
                                                   PORK
                             Guava-Chile Glaze
                                                    1. Use a big heavy
                                                       sauté pan.
    Grilled Pork and Fig Skewers with Sun-Dried
                           Tomato–Basil Relish      2. Dry the meat well.

                                                    3. Season the meat well.
BBQ-Rubbed Grilled Fresh Ham Center Slice with
                   Watermelon-Pineapple Salad       4. Use only a small
                                                       amount of oil.

                                                    5. Get the pan and the
                                                       oil hot.

                                                    6. Don’t overcrowd the
                                                       meat in the pan.

                                                    7. Sear the meat hard.

                                                    8. Flip the meat only once
                                                       while cooking.

                                                    9. Check for doneness
                                                       early and often (nick,
                                                       peek, and cheat).

                                                   10. Remove the meat from
                                                       the heat, cover with foil,
                                                       and allow to rest, then
                                                       serve.

                                                   10 STEPS TO GREAT BROILED
                                                   PORK
                                                      Check out sautéing:
                                                      The steps are the same
                                                      except you use a broiler
                                                      pan instead of a sauté
                                                      pan; preheat the broiler
                                                      instead of getting the
                                                      oil hot and skip the
                                                      searing step.




                                    PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                 355
THE CUT

Here we are calling for a
                                 Grilled Coriander-Crusted,
double-thick version of our
favorite pork chop, the loin
                                 Pickled Corn–Stuffed
rib chop. This chop is cut
from the rib section of the      Double-Thick Pork Chops with
loin, which is toward the
shoulder. Because of this,       Peach Chutney
it has a somewhat higher
fat content than a true cen­             S E RVE S 4
ter-cut chop, which makes
it both more ﬂavorsome
                                 We’re talking corn, we’re talking pickles, we’re talking chutney–could there
and less likely to dry out
during cooking. Rib chops        be any doubt that this recipe is right out of the South?
can be distinguished by                  Pork and corn are an old standby combination to which we’re adding
the section of rib bone that
                                 coriander, one of our favorite spices. We deﬁnitely recommend that you buy
runs along one side.
                                 whole coriander seeds and grind them up yourself, since the ﬂavor is much
OTHER NAMES
                                 clearer and stronger. It’s easy to do this if you just buy an extra electric coffee
Pocket pork chop.                grinder or a large pepper mill and keep it for spices rather than coffee or pepper.
                                         For this recipe, you need some giant chops, thick enough to stuff. That
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           means that we’ll be using the “move and cover” method of grilling to avoid
Any very thick chop from
                                 burning the outside of the meat before the inside is cooked through. Build a
the loin, including the top
loin chop and loin chop, will    two-level ﬁre, brown the chops well on both sides over the hotter part, move
work just ﬁne here.              them to the cooler part, and cover them with a tin or disposable aluminum pie
                                 pan to cook through. (They can also be ﬁnished in a 350°F oven if for some
BUTCHERSPEAK
                                 reason you would rather do that.)
To get chops this thick, you
are probably going to have
                                         Serve this with Hominy with Cheddar, Chiles, and Sour Cream (page
to go to a butcher. As long      438) or simple steamed green beans and a big green salad with blue cheese
as you’re there, you might       dressing. That’s some good eating right there.
want to ask the butcher to
cut the pockets in the                   FOR THE CHUTNEY
chops so you don’t have to.
                                         2 tablespoons olive oil
                                         1 large onion, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced
                                         5 ripe but ﬁrm peaches, pitted and roughly chopped
                                         1 ⁄4   cup packed dark brown sugar
                                         2 tablespoons granulated sugar
                                         2 teaspoons kosher salt
                                         1 teaspoon freshly cracked black pepper
                                         1 ⁄4   teaspoon ground allspice
                                         3 tablespoons molasses
                                         1⁄ 2   cup white vinegar
                                         2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 lemon)

                                         Four 12- to 16-ounce pork loin rib chops, 2 to 21 ⁄ 2 inches thick
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste



356            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1⁄ 3   cup cracked coriander seeds (or 3 tablespoons ground coriander)          COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

     2 ears corn, husked, blanched in boiling salted water for 2 minutes, drained,   Leftovers from this dish
        and kernels cut off the cob (about 1 cup kernels)                            can be made into a really
     3 tablespoons ﬁnely chopped sweet pickles or pickle relish                      nice bread salad. Put the
                                                                                     pork and the relish in a big
     2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
                                                                                     bowl with some cubes of
     1 teaspoon dark brown sugar                                                     stale bread, thin out the
     1 teaspoon celery seeds                                                         peach chutney with some
                                                                                     balsamic vinegar and olive
                                                                                     oil, add it to the bowl, give
       1. Make the chutney: In a medium saucepan, heat the oil over                  it a toss, and you’ve got an
medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and cook,                  exceptional lunch.
stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the peaches and
cook, stirring frequently, for 4 minutes. Add both sugars, the salt, pepper,
allspice, molasses, and vinegar and bring to a simmer, then turn the heat
down to low and simmer for 30 minutes, stirring occasionally. If necessary,
add a small amount of water to prevent the mixture from burning.
Remove the chutney from the heat, stir in the lemon juice, and set aside.
       2. Build a two-level ﬁre in your grill, using about enough charcoal to
ﬁll a large shoe box and tapering the depth of the charcoal in the grill so
that two thirds of the coals are on one side and one third on the other.
      3. Dry the pork chops with paper towels, sprinkle them generously
with salt and pepper, and rub them with the coriander. In a medium bowl,
combine the corn, pickles, vinegar, brown sugar, celery seeds, and salt and
pepper to taste and mix well. Cut a pocket in the side of each pork chop:
Insert a sharp thin-bladed knife, such as a boning knife, into the center of
the side of the chop and, holding the knife in place, sweep the blade back
and forth in a slight sawing motion to create a pocket without enlarging
the opening. Pull the knife out, reinsert it in the same opening with the
blade facing in the opposite direction, and repeat the sawing motion. Put
one quarter of the corn mixture into the pocket in each chop.
        4. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you
can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds),
place the chops over the hottest part of the ﬁre and cook until well seared
on both sides, about 8 minutes per side. Move the chops to the cooler part
of the grill, cover with a metal pie pan or disposable aluminium pie plate,
and continue to cook until the pork is done to your liking, 10 to 12 more
minutes for medium to medium-well. To check for doneness, nick, peek,
and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat and take a
peek; it should be slightly less done than you like it. When the meat is
done to your liking, remove it from the heat, cover it loosely with foil, and
let it rest for 10 minutes.
     5. Serve each chop with a generous spoonful of         the peach chutney.


                                                                    PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                  357
THE CUT

The top loin chop is to pork
                                 Panfried Brined Loin Chops
what New York strip or sir­
loin strip is to beef. It
                                 Stuffed with Walnuts and Stilton
comes pretty much from
the center portion of the        Cheese, with Spiced Apples
loin, and it is a very tender
chop that also has a good                S E RVE S 4

pork ﬂavor. (See The Chop
Shop, page 362, for more         We love blue cheese and meat together. We ﬁgure sometimes it’s best to
details on types of pork
chops.)
                                 just be direct, so in this recipe we stuff a really good blue cheese right inside
                                 some extra-thick pork chops, adding some walnuts for crunch and richness.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           We then ﬁnish them with balsamic apples cooked in the pork juices. We’ll
Rib loin chops, boneless or      wager you will end up using the apples with other pork dishes too. It’s a nice
bone-in, are also great in
                                 way to dress up quickly sautéed thin pork chops, for example, when you don’t
this recipe. Basically, what­
ever center-cut chops from       have time to cook thick ones.
the loin your butcher has in             In this recipe, we brine the thick pork chops for 6 to 8 hours before
this thickness will be ﬁne.
                                 cooking them. We like this technique because the treatment not only makes
                                 today’s lean chops slightly more ﬂavorful, but also helps keep them moist dur­
                                 ing high-heat cooking. But, as always, if you don’t have the time or the incli­
                                 nation, you can skip the brining and still have a great dish. In that case,
                                 though, you might do better to use rib loin chops rather than the top loin
                                 chops we call for here.
                                         Our friend Michael Otten, who faithfully tested dozens of recipes in this
                                 book just for the fun of it, came up with the method used here for making a
                                 large pocket in the double-thick chops with only a small opening in the exte­
                                 rior. Once you get the stufﬁng into the chop, it’s unlikely to come out while
                                 the chops are cooking.
                                         Serve this with Green Beans with Mushrooms and Almonds (page
                                 429) or Braised Leeks (page 430), roasted sweet potatoes, and a simple
                                 green salad.

                                         FOR THE BRINE (OPTIONAL)

                                         5 cups water
                                         1⁄ 2   cup kosher salt
                                         3 ⁄4   cup packed dark brown sugar
                                         1 cup apple cider
                                         2 bay leaves, crushed
                                         6 cardamom pods, crushed
                                         3 allspice berries, crushed
                                         2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper




358            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     FOR THE STUFFING

     6 ounces Stilton or other blue cheese of your choice
     3 ounces walnuts, toasted in a dry skillet over medium heat, shaking
        frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes, and chopped
     1 teaspoon freshly cracked black pepper


     Four 10-ounce boneless pork top loin chops, about 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     2 tablespoons vegetable oil

     F OR TH E SAU CE

     2 large tart apples, cored and cut in eighths
     1 ⁄4   cup balsamic vinegar
     1 ⁄4   cup water
     Generous pinch of ground allspice
     Generous pinch of ground cardamom
     Generous pinch of ground cinnamon
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, cut into small pieces


       1. Make the optional brine: In a bowl large enough to hold the chops,
stir together the water, salt, and sugar until the salt completely dissolves.
Add the remaining brine ingredients and mix well, then add the chops,
making sure that they are completely submerged in the liquid. Refrigerate
for 6 to 8 hours.
     2. Make the stufﬁng: Crumble the cheese into a small bowl, add the
walnuts and pepper, and toss lightly to combine. (Cover and refrigerate if
you are not planning to stuff the chops right away.)
      3. Remove the chops from the brine and pat them dry with paper
towels. Cut a pocket in the side of each pork chop: Insert a sharp thin-
bladed knife, such as a boning knife, into the center of the side of the chop
and, holding the knife in place, sweep the blade back and forth in a slight
sawing motion to create a pocket without enlarging the opening. Pull the
knife out, reinsert it in the same opening with the blade facing in the oppo­
site direction, and repeat the sawing motion. Stuff each chop with one
quarter of the blue cheese mixture. Fasten the slits closed with toothpicks
and sprinkle the chops generously with salt and pepper.
      4. In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very
hot but not smoking. Add the chops and sear well, about 5 minutes per
side. Reduce the heat to medium, cover the pan, and cook until done to
your liking, about 10 minutes more for medium-well. To check for done-



                                                                      PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   359
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE.            ness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of a chop
If you have leftovers, toast     and take a peek; it should be slightly less done than you like it. When the
some bread and make
                                 chops are done, transfer them to a platter and cover them loosely with foil
yourself a pork/apple/blue
cheese sandwich.
                                 to keep warm.
                                        5. Turn the heat back to medium-high. If the pan is dry, add another
                                 tablespoon of oil. Add the apples to the pan and sauté, turning occasion­
                                 ally, until browned on both sides, about 5 to 8 minutes. Add the vinegar
                                 and water and bring to a simmer, stirring to dissolve the brown crusty stuff
                                 in the bottom of the pan. Add the allspice, cardamom, cinnamon, and salt
                                 and pepper and simmer until the liquid is reduced by half, 5 minutes. Swirl
                                 in the butter, a little at a time, until the sauce is shiny and thick. Remove
                                 from the heat.
                                      6. Remove the toothpicks from the chops, arrange some of the
                                 apples and sauce over each chop, and serve.




THE CUT

Here we are using the pork
                                 Macadamia Nut–Crusted Pork
loin chops, which is the
porterhouse steak of pork
                                 Chops with Pineapple-Ginger
chops. The bone separates
a section from the top loin      Catsup
muscle and a smaller sec­
tion from the tenderloin.                S E RVE S 6



OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           There’s a Hawaiian kind of thing going on in this recipe, with the macadamia
Any other type of pork loin      nut crust on the chops and the ﬂavorful Pineapple-Ginger Catsup alongside.
chop would also work in
this recipe. We particularly
                                 And, by the way, if you ﬁnd it odd that we call a pineapple concoction a “cat­
like the bone-in rib chop or     sup,” this is actually nothing new. In the old days, a catsup was simply a vine­
the bone-in top loin chop        gar-based sauce used to preserve all kinds of fruits and vegetables, from
as substitutes. The blade
and sirloin chops would be
                                 mushrooms to mangoes to (that’s right) pineapples. It is only in the relatively
all right as well, although      recent past that this term has come to be reserved for the tomato-based
they might be just a little      condiment we know so well. If you don’t feel like making the catsup, though,
on the tough side for this
particular treatment.
                                 just sauté the pork chops with their rich macadamia crust and serve them
                                 with your favorite salsa.
                                         Although we call for two sauté pans here, if you have a really giant,
                                 restaurant-sized pan that will comfortably hold all six chops in a single layer,
                                 go for it. The idea is just that the chops should not be too crowded, or they
                                 won’t brown right.
                                         You might serve this with plain rice or a grain salad and maybe even
                                 Simple Lentils (page 425).


360            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      F O R T H E C AT S U P                                                            COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE
      1 ⁄4   cup olive oil                                                              The catsup recipe here
      1 red onion, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced                                    makes considerably more
                                                                                        than you will use with
      1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and roughly chopped
                                                                                        these chops. That’s a good
      1 green bell pepper, cored, seeded, and roughly chopped                           thing, though, because it
      1 ⁄4   cup minced fresh ginger                                                    will keep, covered and
                                                                                        refrigerated, for several
      1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                                                                        weeks. That way, you’re
      1 tablespoon minced fresh chile peppers of your choice                            ready to instantly add a ton
      3 tablespoons curry powder                                                        of ﬂavor to a quick sautéed
      1 large pineapple, peeled, cored, and cut into 1 ⁄ 2-inch chunks (about 4 cups)   pork chop or even a nice
      1⁄ 2
                                                                                        grilled steak any time you
             cup dark raisins
                                                                                        want.
      11 ⁄4 cups white vinegar
      1⁄ 2   cup orange or pineapple juice
      1 cup packed dark brown sugar
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      Six 10- to 12-ounce bone-in pork loin chops, 1 to 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      1⁄ 2   cup macadamia nuts or peanuts, toasted in a dry skillet over medium
             heat, shaken frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes, and crushed
      2 tablespoons unsalted butter
      2 tablespoons vegetable oil


       1. Make the catsup: In a large saucepan, heat the oil over medium-
high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and bell peppers and
sauté, stirring occasionally, until the onion becomes translucent, 7 to 9 min­
utes. Add the ginger, garlic, chile peppers, and curry powder and sauté, stir­
ring, for 1 minute. Add the pineapple, raisins, vinegar, juice, and brown sugar
and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to low and simmer, stirring occasion­
ally, until the liquid has thickened slightly, 10 to 15 minutes. Season with salt
and pepper, remove from the heat, and allow to cool slightly. Puree brieﬂy
in a blender, leaving the catsup slightly chunky; cover and set aside.
      2. Dry the pork chops with paper towels and sprinkle generously
with salt and pepper. Rub them all over with the crushed macadamias,
pressing gently to be sure they adhere. Divide the butter and oil equally
between two sauté pans and heat over medium heat until the butter has
melted. Add 3 chops to each sauté pan and cook until done to your liking,
5 to 7 minutes per side for medium-well. To check for doneness, nick,
peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of one of the chops;
it should be slightly less done than you like it. Remove the chops from the
pans, cover with foil, and let them rest for about 5 minutes.
      3. Serve the chops, passing the catsup on the side.


                                                                      PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                  361
  THE CHOP SHOP
  All pork chops come from the loin of the hog. This is basically the upper back from the shoulder to the leg,
  the most tender part of the animal. As a result, all pork chops are quite tender. But there are differences
  between chops cut from various parts of the loin, which is, after all, quite a large part of the hog. These dif­
  ferences are signiﬁcant enough to make it worth knowing which is which. Basically there are ﬁve types of
  chops. The problem is that they are not always properly labeled, so you don’t always know exactly what you
  are getting. But there are some visual clues that can help.
       Chops taken from the two extreme ends of the loin are relatively rare in supermarkets. The blade chop,
  also called the pork chop end cut, comes from the section of the loin right next to the shoulder. The sirloin
  chop, sometimes called the pork sirloin steak, is taken from the end of the loin right next to the hip. Both of
  these have more connective tissue, more fat, and a higher ratio of bone to meat than chops from the center
  section of the loin.
       Much more common are the three types of chops that can be labeled “center cut”—the rib chop, loin
  chop, and top loin chop. While these chops shade into one another as you move along the loin, there are def­
  initely distinctions. The rib chop comes from the part of the loin nearer the shoulder, which means it has a lit­
  tle bit more fat than the other center-cut chops. It can be distinguished by the small curved section of rib
  bone that runs along one side. The loin chop, which is most often simply labeled “center cut,” comes from the
  center and rear center sections of the loin. It contains portions of the top loin muscle and the tenderloin
  muscle, divided from each other by a bone that is the distinguishing mark of this type of chop. The top loin
  chop is essentially a loin chop without the tenderloin section. Because pork tenderloin is such a popular
  piece of meat, this is the way most center-cut chops are butchered these days.
       For many people, a helpful way of keeping these three straight is to think of them in terms of what they
  would be if they came from a cow. So here it is: a rib chop is like a rib-eye steak; a top loin chop is like a top
  loin steak, also known as a New York strip or sirloin strip; and a loin chop is like a T-bone or porterhouse.
       Our particular favorite is the rib chop. Now that pork is so lean, the little extra fat on this chop is a deﬁ­
  nite advantage. It not only gives the meat more ﬂavor, but also makes it less likely to dry out during cooking.




                         Loin and chops illustrations here




362          H OW T O C O O K M E AT
White Pepper–Crusted Pork Loin                                                          THE CUT

                                                                                        See Macadamia Nut–

Chops with Peanut-Ginger Power                                                          Crusted Pork Chops (page
                                                                                        360) for details on the pork

Pack                                                                                    loin chop and other cuts
                                                                                        that can be substituted for
                                                                                        it. As usual, when you’re
        S E RVE S 4                                                                     looking for chops this thick,
                                                                                        it’s a good idea to call the
Pepper-crusting meat is a technique I (Chris) really like. Like a spice rub, a coat­    butcher and make sure he
                                                                                        has some on hand.
ing of pepper gives the meat a super-ﬂavorful crust and creates a real contrast
in ﬂavor and texture between the inside and the outside. For an Asian take, I use
white pepper here. This is a very straightforward dish with plenty of ﬂavor that
you can make when you come home and want a quick dinner that’s not boring.
If you make the power pack ahead of time (it will keep, covered and refrigerated,
for 3 to 4 days), you can have this on the table in about 20 minutes.
        Serve this with brown rice and maybe some Roasted Asparagus (page
427).

        F O R T H E P O W E R PA C K
        1 ⁄4   cup ﬁnely chopped roasted unsalted peanuts
        2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
        1 jalapeño or other small chile pepper, minced
        4 scallions, (white and light green parts), very thinly sliced
        2 tablespoons ﬁnely chopped fresh mint
        2 tablespoons sesame oil
        1 teaspoon sugar

        Four 10-ounce pork loin chops, about 11 ⁄ 2 inches thick
        Kosher salt to taste
        2 tablespoons freshly ground white pepper (or substitute black pepper)
        1 tablespoon vegetable oil


      1. In a small bowl, combine all the power pack ingredients and mix
well; set aside.
     2. Sprinkle the chops generously with salt and rub all over with the
white pepper, pressing gently to be sure it adheres.
      3. In a large sauté pan, heat the vegetable oil over medium-high heat
until hot but not smoking. Add the chops and brown well on both sides, 5
to 7 minutes per side. Turn down the heat to medium-low and continue to
cook until the chops are just lightly pink in the center, 3 to 4 minutes. To
check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in one of the



                                                                         PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES               363
                                 chops at the thickest point; it should be slightly less done than you want it
                                 to be. Remove the chops from the heat, cover loosely with foil, and let
                                 them rest for 5 minutes.
                                      4. Stir the peanut-ginger mixture, spoon a portion over each chop,
                                 and serve.



THE CUT

These cutlets are made
                                 Sautéed Pork Cutlets with Cashew
from boneless pork top
loin chops that have been
                                 Slaw and Chile Flavor Booster
pounded to a thickness of
about 1 ⁄ 2 inch. The ﬁne-               S E RVE S 4

grained texture of these
chops makes them ideal           Asian ﬂavors predominate in this dish, in which thin pork cutlets are sautéed
for this purpose.
                                 quickly, then placed on top of a spicy cabbage slaw with lots of crunchy
                                 cashews in it, and ﬁnally topped with an intense ﬂavor booster at the last
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

Any center-cut pork loin         minute. The result is a lot of ﬂavor and interesting textures for not that much
chop is great here, and the      work.
sirloin cutlet and loin blade
                                         As for the cut of meat, some of you might be wondering why the same
chop will also work ﬁne.
(See The Chop Shop, page         piece of pork is sometimes called a chop, sometimes a cutlet, and sometimes
362, for more information        a ﬁllet. To be honest, it’s a combination of logic and caprice. Technically
about various types of pork
                                 speaking, a chop is a relatively small piece of meat taken from the rib section
chops.)
                                 of an animal and usually including part of the rib bone. So when this piece of
                                 meat has a bone, it’s deﬁnitely a chop. In the old days, a chop without a bone
                                 was called a ﬁllet, which is deﬁned as a boneless piece of meat (or ﬁsh). But
                                 nowadays we also call it, more simply, a boneless chop. As for the cutlet, that
                                 is a very thin, tender piece of meat usually taken from the rib or leg of an ani­
                                 mal. So a chop that is pounded thin can become a cutlet. And there you have
                                 it: same piece of meat, three names.
                                         Whatever you call it, the pork here is thin and tender, so we cook it at
                                 high heat to get it nicely browned on the outside before it overcooks on the
                                 inside. To accomplish that, make sure that your oil is hot before you put the
                                 cutlets in the pan.
                                         Serve this with brown or white rice and some Braised Fennel (page
                                 438).

                                         F O R T H E F L AV O R B O O S T E R

                                         2 to 3 jalapeños, thinly sliced
                                         1 ⁄4   cup ﬁsh sauce (or substitute 2 tablespoons sesame oil)
                                         2 tablespoons soy sauce
                                         Pinch of sugar



364            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      F OR TH E S LAW                                                                 COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE
      2 cups shredded green cabbage                                                   You can use any leftover
      1 cup peeled and shredded carrots (about 1 large or 2 small carrots)            pork in a quick stir-fry with
      1⁄ 2
                                                                                      garlic, carrots, bell peppers,
             cup bean sprouts of your choice (optional)
                                                                                      and onions, serving any
      1⁄ 2   cup cashews, toasted in a 350°F oven for 5 to 7 minutes                  leftover slaw on the side. If
      2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger                                               you have any booster left,
                                                                                      put that in the stir-fry too.
      1 tablespoon minced fresh chile peppers of your choice, or to taste
                                                                                      In fact, you might want to
      1 teaspoon minced garlic                                                        make a double or triple
      2 tablespoons cracked coriander seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground coriander)        batch of the ﬂavor booster
      1 ⁄4   cup sugar                                                                while you’re at it, since it
      1 ⁄4
                                                                                      keeps well if covered and
             cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
                                                                                      refrigerated, and it adds a
      1 ⁄4   cup soy sauce                                                            ton of ﬂavor to any dish in
      1 ⁄4   cup molasses                                                             just seconds.
      1⁄ 2   cup peanut oil
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      Four 8-ounce boneless pork top loin chops
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      2 tablespoons olive oil


      1. Make the chile booster: In a small bowl, combine all the ingredi­
ents and mix well to dissolve the sugar; set aside.
       2. Make the cashew slaw: In a very large bowl, combine the cabbage,
carrots, bean sprouts, if using, and cashews and mix well. In a food proces­
sor or blender, combine the ginger, chiles, garlic, coriander, sugar, lime
juice, soy sauce, molasses, peanut oil, and salt and pepper and process until
well blended. Pour this dressing over the vegetables, toss to coat thor­
oughly, and set aside.
      3. Dry the chops with paper towels, place them between two sheets
of plastic wrap, and, using a meat mallet or other blunt instrument, such
as the bottom of a sauté pan, pound them to a thickness of about 1⁄ 2 inch.
Now they are cutlets. Sprinkle them generously with salt and pepper.
      4. In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-high heat until hot
but not smoking. Add the cutlets, in batches if necessary to avoid crowd­
ing, and cook until well browned and done to your liking, 3 to 4 minutes
per side for medium-well. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat:
Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat; it should be slightly less
done than you like it. Remove the cutlets from the pan, cover them loosely
with foil, and let them rest for 5 minutes before serving.
     5. To serve, place some of the cashew slaw on each plate, top with a
pork cutlet, and top the pork with a spoonful of the ﬂavor booster.


                                                                       PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                365
THE CUT

Pork loin ﬁllets, which we
                                 Grilled Pork Loin Fillets on
call for in this recipe, are
basically boneless top loin
                                 Latin-Style Salad with Sour
chops. You should be able
to ﬁnd these in most             Orange–Oregano Dressing
supermarkets, because the
ones we are using here are               S E RVE S 4

less than an inch thick. But
you still want to have some      Sometimes people tell us that they think meat is too heavy to eat when it’s
thickness on these chops,
so avoid the very thin ver­
                                 really hot outside. But that doesn’t make sense to us, since people in the
sions.                           tropics eat meat, particularly pork. So it stands to reason that there are many
                                 ways to combine meat with other ingredients in dishes that are perfect for
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           summer meals. This is one of them.
Boneless rib chops are
                                         In this dish, ﬁllets sliced from the tender and relatively lean pork loin are
excellent in this recipe. You
can also substitute ﬁllets       grilled quickly with a little cumin and then served on top of a super-fresh
cut from the super-tender        salad with an array of Latin American ﬂavors going on. This salad is actually a
and readily available pork
                                 good illustration of the fact that greens, while important to any salad, don’t
tenderloin. Farther down
the tenderness scale,            have to be the primary ingredient.
boneless sirloin chops or                Serve this with Latin-Style Black Beans and Rice (page 422), fried
blade chops are also OK.
                                 plantains or yucca, and some watermelon and you’ve got a great meal.

                                         FOR THE DRESSING
                                         1 ⁄4   cup fresh orange juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 orange)
                                         1 ⁄4   cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)
                                         1⁄ 3   cup olive oil
                                         1 ⁄4   cup red wine vinegar
                                         1 teaspoon minced garlic
                                         2 teaspoons sugar
                                         1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh oregano
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                         FOR THE SALAD

                                         2 ears corn, husked
                                         2 avocados, peeled, pitted, and diced large
                                         2 tomatoes (about the size of a baseball), cored and diced large
                                         1 red onion, peeled and diced small
                                         1 cup cooked (or drained canned) black beans
                                         1 bunch arugula, trimmed, washed, and dried
                                         Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste

                                         Four 6-ounce boneless pork loin ﬁllets, about 3 ⁄4 inch thick
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         2 tablespoons ground cumin



366            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

     2. In a medium bowl, combine all the dressing ingredients and whisk
together well; set aside.
       3. Make the salad: Blanch the corn in boiling salted water for 2 min­
utes, drain, and cool under cold running water. Slice the kernels off the
ears. (You should have about 1 cup of kernels.) Place the kernels in a large
bowl, add all the remaining salad ingredients, and set aside.
       4. Dry the pork ﬁllets with paper towels, sprinkle them generously
with salt and pepper, and rub them all over with the cumin, pressing gen­
tly to be sure it adheres.
      5. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you
can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds),
place the ﬁllets on the grill and cook until well seared on one side, about 5
minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the desired doneness, about 5 min­
utes total cooking time for medium-well. To check for doneness, nick,
peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat and
take a peek; it should be slightly less done than you like it. When the meat
is done to your liking, remove it from the grill, cover it loosely with foil,
and let it rest for 5 minutes.
      6. Pour enough of the dressing over the salad to moisten the ingredi­
ents and toss well. Place a portion of the salad on each plate and top with
a ﬁllet.




                                                               PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   367
THE CUT

These scallopini are basi­
                                Sautéed Pork Scallopini
cally boneless pork top loin
chops pounded to a 1⁄4­
                                over Scallion Lo Mein with
inch thickness. As with
cutlets, the smooth, ﬁne-       Soy-Braised Bok Choy
grained texture of the pork
loin makes it ideal for this            S E RVE S 4

treatment.
                                Because pork combines so well with Asian ﬂavors such as soy and ginger,
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE          it’s ideal for Asian-style noodle dishes, which we like a lot. Here we cook
Any boneless pork loin
                                some lo mein–style noodles, braise some bok choy in a ﬂavorful soy-ginger
chop will work ﬁne here.
(See The Chop Shop, page        sauce, and then quickly cook some pieces of thin pork loin to lay over the top,
362, for more information       all of which makes for a nice combination of textures as well as ﬂavors.
about particular types of
                                        Although we are not ordinarily big fans of baby vegetables, bok choy is
pork chops.) You could
even use a fresh ham            an exception. Since the miniature versions of these Asian cabbages are very
steak from the leg of the       tender, you can just cut them into quarters and cook them; that way, you get
hog, although it might not
                                both leaves and stems in the same serving. Plus they look neat on the plate,
have as ﬁne a grain and
therefore not be quite as       sort of like an Asian version of baby artichokes.
easy to pound.                          Some of you might also notice that we’re adding yet another term to
                                the trio of chop, cutlet, and ﬁllet, which all apply to what is basically the same
                                cut of pork loin. To put it simply, scallopine is the Italian term for a cutlet
                                pounded quite thin, usually breaded. (We ﬁgure the more terms you know for
                                any piece of meat, the more fun it is.)
                                        It’s important here that you pound the pork down to no more than 1 ⁄4
                                inch thick so it will cook quickly and evenly. Besides, if the pork is thicker than
                                that, it somehow seems too clunky for the rest of the dish.

                                        1 pound ﬂat noodles, such as linguine, fettuccine, or lo mein
                                        5 tablespoons sesame oil
                                        Eight 4-ounce boneless pork top loin chops (or four 8-ounce chops, sliced
                                           horizontally in half)
                                        3 tablespoons peanut oil
                                        1 pound baby bok choy, trimmed and quartered
                                        2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                        1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                        1 ⁄4   cup soy sauce
                                        1 ⁄4   cup water
                                        1 ⁄4   cup rice wine vinegar
                                        1 teaspoon dark brown sugar
                                        1⁄ 2   to 1 teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




368           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1 ⁄4   cup toasted sesame seeds
     1⁄ 2   cup chopped scallions (green and white parts)


     1. Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil over high heat. Add the
noodles and cook until just barely tender, 3 to 5 minutes. Drain, refresh
under cold water, and drain again.
       2. Place the noodles in a large bowl, add 2 tablespoons of the sesame
oil, and toss to coat. Cover and refrigerate until ready to use. (You can do
this several hours ahead if you want.)
      3. Dry the chops with paper towels, place them between two sheets
of plastic wrap, and, using a meat mallet or other blunt instrument, such
as the bottom of a sauté pan, pound them to a thickness of about 1⁄4 inch.
Now they are scallopini. Set them aside.
     4. In a large sauté pan, heat 1 tablespoon each of the sesame and
peanut oil over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the bok
choy and cook, stirring occasionally, until golden brown, about 3 minutes.
Add the ginger and garlic and cook, stirring, for 2 minutes. Add the soy
sauce, water, vinegar, brown sugar, and red pepper ﬂakes and bring to a
simmer. Lower the heat to medium, partially cover the pan, and simmer,
turning occasionally, until the bok choy is very tender, about 15 minutes.
       5. While the bok choy is braising, put another large sauté pan over
medium-high heat, add the remaining 2 tablespoons peanut oil, and heat
until it is hot but not smoking. Sprinkle the scallopini generously with salt
and pepper and add them to the pan in a single layer, in batches if neces­
sary to avoid crowding, and cook until well browned on both sides and just
cooked through, 3 to 4 minutes per side; remove them to a platter as they
are done. When all the meat has been browned, cover the platter with foil
and set aside.
      6. Pour off and discard any peanut oil left in the pan. Return the pan
to medium-high heat and add the remaining 2 tablespoons sesame oil. Add
the noodles, sesame seeds, and scallions, tossing with tongs until the mix­
ture is well combined. Transfer the noodles to a platter.
     7. To serve, arrange the bok choy around the noodles, then cut the
pork into slices about 1⁄ 2 inch wide and lay them on top of the noodles.
Drizzle the bok choy braising liquid over the pork and serve.




                                                               PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   369
THE CUT

Boneless top loin chops
                                 Grilled Boneless Pork Loin Chops
are the New York strip of
pork chops. Taken from the
                                 with Green Olive–Red Onion
top loin muscle of the loin,
they are very tender and         Relish and Nectarine Chutney
although they are mild,
they do have good pork ﬂa­               S E RVE S 4

vor. This is “the other white
meat” in action. You don’t       We think the southern Mediterranean ﬂavors of this relish—green olives, red
need really thick chops
here, but do try to get them
                                 onions, a bit of garlic, and some red pepper ﬂakes–complement pork really
around an inch thick or so;      well. As an added advantage, this is one place that you can use pimiento-
otherwise, overcooking           stuffed olives to great effect.
them is hard to avoid.
                                         To balance the olive relish, we have the sweet-sour aspect of the nec­

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                 tarine chutney, with its strong undercurrent of coriander. Of course, you can
Any “center cut” pork chop       leave the chutney out if you want and still have an excellent dish. But this
of the right thickness will      recipe makes quite a lot of chutney and it keeps well, covered and refriger­
be great in this recipe, as
                                 ated, so you might want to go ahead and make it—then you’ll have a super-
will loin rib chops or even
loin sirloin cutlets.            tasty condiment in reserve for another dinner.
                                         Serve this with Simple Rice Pilaf (page 417) and a Tomato Hobo Pack
                                 (page 443).

                                         FOR THE CHUTNEY

                                         2 tablespoons olive oil
                                         2 onions, peeled and diced small
                                         8 ripe nectarines, peeled, pitted, and cut into sixths
                                         1 medium red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced small
                                         6 tablespoons dark brown sugar
                                         1 ⁄4   cup granulated sugar
                                         1 tablespoon molasses
                                         1 ⁄4   cup dark raisins
                                         1⁄ 2   cup fresh orange juice (about 1 orange), or more if needed
                                         1⁄ 2   cup white vinegar
                                         2 teaspoons kosher salt
                                         1 tablespoon freshly cracked black pepper
                                         1 tablespoon cracked coriander seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 teaspoons ground coriander)
                                         2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 ⁄ 2 lemon)
                                         1 teaspoon roughly chopped fresh mint

                                         FOR THE RELISH
                                         1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped pitted green olives (with pimientos is OK)
                                         1⁄ 2   small red onion, peeled and thinly sliced




370            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar                                                 COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE
      1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil                                              If you have any chops left
                                                                                     over, cut them into small
      1 teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes
                                                                                     chunks, mix them with any
      1 teaspoon minced garlic                                                       leftover relish, and serve
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                          the combination over white
                                                                                     rice, with the chutney on
      Four 8-ounce boneless pork top loin chops, about 1 inch thick                  the side.
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


       1. Make the chutney: In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-
high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onions and cook, stirring
occasionally, until translucent, 9 to 11 minutes. Add the nectarines and bell
pepper and cook for 3 to 4 minutes, stirring occasionally. Add both sugars,
the molasses, raisins, orange juice, vinegar, salt, pepper, and coriander and
bring to a simmer, then reduce the heat to low and cook, stirring occa­
sionally, until thickened, 30 to 45 minutes. Add a small amount of water or
orange juice if the chutney begins to stick to the bottom of the pan.
Remove from the heat and allow the chutney to cool for 10 minutes, then
stir in the lemon juice and mint and set aside.
      2. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

    3. While the ﬁre is heating up, make the relish: In a medium bowl,
combine all the ingredients and mix well; set aside.
      4. Dry the chops with paper towels and sprinkle them generously
with salt and pepper. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are
medium-hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3
to 4 seconds), place the chops on the grill and cook until well seared on
one side, 5 to 7 minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the desired done-
ness, 5 to 7 minutes more for medium-well. To check for doneness, nick,
peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat and
take a peek; it should be slightly less done than you like it. When the meat
is done, remove it from the grill, cover it loosely with foil, and let it rest for
5 minutes.
      5. Top each chop with a tablespoon or two of the relish and serve,
passing the chutney separately.




                                                                   PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                 371
THE CUT

The blade chop comes
                                 Hoisin-Glazed Grilled Pork Blade
from the section of the loin
right next to the shoulder.
                                 Chops with Spicy Korean
This means that it has
more connective tissue and       Vegetables
a little more fat than cuts
from the center of the loin,             S E RVE S 4

but it also has more ﬂavor.
We like it for that reason,      We really like the pairing of hoisin sauce and pork. In fact, we really like hoisin
and also because we don’t
mind a little gnarliness in
                                 sauce in general. One of the most popular sauces of Chinese cooking, it is a
our chops.                       thick, sweetish, dark red mixture made from soybeans, garlic, vinegar, sugar,
                                 chile peppers, and various spices. Think of it as the Chinese version of cat­
OTHER NAMES                      sup, but with stronger ﬂavors.
Pork chop end cut, pork
                                         To go along with the hoisin-brushed chops, we take a page from the
blade steak.
                                 Korean kimchee book and make what amounts to quick pickled vegetables.
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           Letting them sit in salt for a couple of hours draws some moisture out of the
Any center-cut pork loin         vegetables, which makes them kind of tender-crisp and also intensiﬁes their
chop (rib, loin, or top loin     ﬂavors a bit. Just be sure you rinse them really well before adding the other
chop) would be a good
substitute here. You can
                                 ingredients.
also use shoulder blade                  Serve this with brown rice and you’re all set for a slightly exotic, light
chops, although that is get­     summer meal.
ting a bit far into the tough
area for grilling.                       F O R T H E V E G E TA B L E S

                                         3 cucumbers, unpeeled, cut lengthwise into thirds, seeded, and cut into
                                            ﬁnger-sized pieces
                                         1 carrot, peeled and cut into ﬁnger-sized pieces
                                         1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and cut into thin strips
                                         1⁄ 2   cup kosher salt
                                         1 bunch watercress, tough stems trimmed, washed, and dried
                                         1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                         1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger
                                         1 tablespoon minced fresh chile peppers of your choice, or less to taste
                                         2 tablespoons sugar
                                         1 ⁄4   cup white vinegar
                                         1 tablespoon paprika
                                         2 teaspoons freshly cracked white pepper (or substitute black pepper)
                                         1 ⁄4   cup sesame seeds, toasted in a 350°F oven for 5 minutes

                                         Four 10- to 12-ounce pork blade chops, about 1 inch thick
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         1⁄ 2   cup hoisin sauce




372            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. Make the vegetables: Rub the cucumbers, carrot, and bell pepper        COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

all over with the salt, put in a bowl, cover, and refrigerate for 2 hours.      Leftover pork from this
                                                                                dish is another excellent
Rinse very well and drain.
                                                                                candidate for pork fried
      2. In a large bowl, combine the vegetables with the watercress, garlic,   rice, and you can serve the
                                                                                leftover spicy vegetables
ginger, chiles, sugar, vinegar, paprika, and pepper and mix well. Sprinkle
                                                                                on the side.
with the toasted sesame seeds and set aside.
     3. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

      4. Dry the pork chops and sprinkle them generously with salt and
pepper. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you
can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds),
place the chops on the grill and cook until well seared on one side, 5 to 7
minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the desired doneness, 5 to 7 min­
utes more for medium-well. During the last 30 seconds of cooking, brush
the chops liberally with the hoisin sauce. To check for doneness, nick,
peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the meat and
take a peek; it should be slightly less done than you like it. When the chops
are done to your liking, remove them from the grill, cover them loosely
with foil, and let them rest for about 5 minutes.
     5. Serve the chops accompanied by the Korean vegetables.




                                                               PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                373
THE CUT

For this particular treat­
                                Grilled Thin Pork Chops with
ment, we like chops with a
little bit more fat on them.
                                Avocado-Corn Salsa
(The hot ﬁre makes it
crispy and, to us, it makes             S E RVE S 4

the chops taste kind of like
bacon.) First choice is a       We have been saying over and over again, “Thick, thick, thick is the way to go
pork loin blade chop, which
                                with meat.” So why, you may ask, are we suddenly going thin? Well, it’s
comes from the part of the
loin closest to the shoul­      because sometimes, with certain cuts and the right type of heat, thin is good.
der. The sirloin chop, from             I (Chris) was in Guadalajara, Mexico, a few years ago, walking down
the opposite end of the loin
                                the street, and I stopped at one of those open-air restaurants where they
near the hip, is also good.
                                were cooking thin pork chops over a really hot ﬁre. They got them on the ﬁre
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE          and off again so quickly that instead of overcooking, they just got beautifully
Any thin-cut pork chop will     seared, and with the fat and the smokiness, they tasted like bacon. Some
work ﬁne in this recipe.        time later, I was stuck in a supermarket situation and super-thin pork chops
                                were all I could get, so I decided to cook them that way and ended up really
                                loving them.
                                        The key here is to have a super-hot ﬁre, then take the pork chops with
                                their ﬂavorful marinade and get them on and off in a hurry. Six minutes is
                                about the total cooking time here.
                                        That means this is a great dish to make when you have a lot of people
                                coming over. You can make the salsa the day before, then cook up the pork
                                chops in a hurry. (If you don’t get the salsa made, you can always pinch-hit by
                                accompanying the chops with some chunked avocadoes dressed with a sim­
                                ple lime vinaigrette.)
                                        Serve this with a tomato salad, Latin-Style Black Beans and Rice (page
                                422), and a Sweet Potato–Raisin Hobo Pack (page 441).

                                        1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                        2 tablespoons cumin seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground cumin)
                                        1 tablespoon red pepper ﬂakes, or to taste
                                        1⁄ 2   cup fresh lime juice (about 4 limes)
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        Eight 6-ounce pork loin blade or pork sirloin chops, about 1 ⁄ 2 inch thick

                                        FOR THE SALSA

                                        3 ears corn, husked
                                        3 ripe but ﬁrm avocados, peeled, pitted, and diced large
                                        1 red onion, peeled and diced small
                                        1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced small
                                        1⁄ 3   cup olive oil
                                        1 ⁄4   cup red wine vinegar



374           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1 tablespoon minced garlic                                                COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

     4 to 8 dashes Tabasco sauce                                               If you have any chops left
                                                                               over, the meat is fantastic
     1 tablespoon ground cumin
                                                                               mixed into rice and beans.
     1 teaspoon chile powder
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh oregano
     1⁄ 2   cup lime juice (about 4 limes)
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. In a large bowl, combine the garlic, cumin, red pepper ﬂakes, lime
juice, and salt and pepper and mix well. Add the pork chops, cover, and
refrigerate, turning the chops over once, for about 30 minutes. (If you
didn’t think ahead, you can dunk them for as little as 5 minutes.)
     2. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

      3. Meanwhile, make the salsa: Blanch the corn in boiling salted water
for 2 minutes, drain, and cool under cold running water. Cut the kernels
off the cobs and place them in a medium bowl. Add all the remaining salsa
ingredients, mix well, and set aside.
       4. Remove the chops from the lime juice mixture. When the ﬁre has
died down and the coals are very hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches
above the grill surface for only 1 second), place the chops on the grill and
sear well on one side, about 3 minutes. Turn and continue cooking to the
desired doneness, about 3 minutes longer for medium-well. To check for
doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of
one of the chops and peek inside; it should be slightly less done than you
like it. Remove the chops from the grill, cover loosely with foil, and let
them rest for 5 minutes.
     5. Serve the chops accompanied by the salsa.




                                                              PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                 375
THE CUT

Just as with beef, the ten­
                                   Molasses-Glazed Pork Tenderloin
derloin is the most tender
cut of pork. It is also very
                                   with Seared Sweet-and-Sour Red
low in fat—about the same
per serving as a boneless,         Onions and Sage-Date Power Pack
skinless chicken breast.
Since it is relatively small, it           S E RVE S 4 TO 5

is sold whole—in fact, these
days you often see two of          If you have not cooked with pork tenderloin, we very strongly encourage you
these mini-roasts sold
together in a Cryovac pack­
                                   do to so. Tenderloins are easy to ﬁnd in any market, and they are sort of mini-
age. The tenderloin has a          roasts, which is cool. They weigh anywhere from 12 to 16 ounces, and they
little less pork ﬂavor than        are not only quick and easy to cook, they are also incredibly tender.
other fattier cuts, but it is
convenient and readily
                                           This recipe takes a pretty straightforward approach to the tenderloin, in
available and tasty and            which we sear it stovetop and then ﬁnish cooking it in a high-heat oven. This
easy to cook. We like it           is a technique that you see very often in professional kitchens. The key is to
a lot.
                                   make sure you get it really nice and brown when you sear it. During the last
                                   few minutes of cooking, we put a simple molasses glaze on the pork (don’t
                                   put it on earlier, or it will burn), then serve it on some sweet-sour onions and
                                   top it with a power pack of unctuously sweet dates moderated with earthy
                                   sage.
                                           This seems like a fall dish to us, so we would serve it with German-Style
                                   Braised Red Cabbage (page 434) and some applesauce or (even better)
                                   peach sauce.

                                           3 tablespoons olive oil
                                           2 red onions, peeled and thinly sliced
                                           1⁄ 3   cup molasses
                                           1 ⁄4   cup dry red wine
                                           Three 12- to 14-ounce pork tenderloins, trimmed of external fat
                                           Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                           3 tablespoons balsamic vinegar

                                           F O R T H E P O W E R PA C K
                                           1⁄ 3   cup chopped pitted dates
                                           1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh sage
                                           1 teaspoon minced garlic
                                           2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil


                                           1. Preheat the oven to 450°F.

                                       2. In a large ovenproof sauté pan, heat 2 tablespoons of the oil over
                                   medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onions and cook,




376              H OW T O C O O K M E AT
stirring occasionally, until they are golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes.
Remove the onions to a bowl.
     3. Combine the molasses and wine in a small bowl; set aside.

       4. Dry the tenderloins with paper towels and sprinkle them gener­
ously with salt and pepper. Add the remaining 1 tablespoon oil to the pan,
return to medium-high heat, and heat until the oil is hot but not smoking.
(Note: If your pan is not large enough to comfortably hold the 3 tender­
loins, use two smaller pans.) Add the tenderloins and sear well on all sides,
about 12 minutes total.
       5. When the tenderloins are well browned, place the pan in the oven
and roast, brushing the tenderloins generously with the molasses mixture
after about 8 minutes, until they are done to your liking, 10 to 14 minutes
for medium-well. To check for doneness, insert a thermometer into the
dead center of the meat and wait for 5 seconds, then check the tempera­
ture: It should be 150°F. Or you can nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch
cut in the thickest part of the meat and take a peek; it should be slightly
less done than you like it. When the pork is done, remove it from the oven,
brush once more with the molasses mixture, cover loosely with foil, and
let rest for 10 minutes.
      6. Meanwhile, add the balsamic vinegar to the onions and toss to
combine thoroughly. In a small bowl, combine the dates, sage, garlic, and
olive oil and mix well.
      7. Slice the pork into slices about 1 inch thick. Place the onions on
individual serving plates or a platter, top with the sliced pork, and sprinkle
with the date mixture.




                                                                PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   377
THE CUT

See Molasses-Glazed Pork
                               Grilled Pork Tenderloin on a
Tenderloin (page 376) for
details about pork tender­
                               Salad of Grilled Potatoes and Red
loin.
                               Onions
                                       S E RVE S 4 TO 5



                               Pork tenderloins are superb on the grill. As is ﬁtting with this very adaptable
                               cut, the approach is simple. You just put them over the hot part of your two-
                               level ﬁre and sear them well, rolling them around every once in a while to be
                               sure they get evenly brown. Then you move them to the cooler part of the ﬁre
                               to let them ﬁnish cooking.
                                       In this recipe, we grill some onions and potatoes on the hotter part of
                               the ﬁre after the tenderloin moves over to the cooler part, then toss them with
                               lettuce and a spicy dressing to make a salad base for the tenderloin. It’s
                               pretty easy, and it all comes together well.
                                       Serve this with corn on the cob and a Mushroom and Kale Hobo Pack
                               (page 443). For dessert, try some grilled peaches with honey and cinnamon.

                                       FOR THE DRESSING
                                       3 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                       1 ⁄4   cup balsamic vinegar
                                       1 tablespoon celery seeds
                                       1 tablespoon cracked coriander seeds (or 11 ⁄ 2 teaspoons ground coriander)
                                       1 teaspoon minced garlic
                                       1 tablespoon sugar
                                       2 tablespoons grainy mustard
                                       1 teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes, or to taste
                                       Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

                                       Three 10- to 12-ounce pork tenderloins, trimmed of external fat
                                       Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                       2 medium red onions, peeled and cut into 1 ⁄ 2-inch-thick rounds
                                       10 small new potatoes (about the size of a golf ball), cooked in boiling
                                          salted water until easily pierced with a fork, about 15 minutes, and
                                          drained
                                       2 tablespoons olive oil
                                       1 head lettuce of your choice, washed, dried, and torn into bite-sized pieces


                                    1. Using enough charcoal to ﬁll a large shoe box, light a two-level ﬁre
                               in your grill, putting about three quarters of the coals on one side and
                               about one quarter on the other side.


378          H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      2. In a small bowl, whisk all the dressing ingredients together well,
then set aside.
       3. Dry the tenderloins with paper towels and sprinkle them gener­
ously with salt and pepper. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are
hot on one side (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for
1 to 2 seconds) and medium-hot on the other (you can hold your hand 5
inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds), place the tenderloins on
the hot part of the grill and cook, turning once or twice, for 12 to 15 min­
utes, long enough to develop a brown crusty sear on the outside. Move the
tenderloins to the cooler side of the grill and cook, turning occasionally,
for 10 to 12 minutes longer. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat:
Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the thickest part of the tenderloin and peek inside; it
should be slightly less done than you like it. When the tenderloins are
done to your liking, remove them from the grill, cover them loosely with
foil, and let them rest for 10 minutes before slicing.
      4. Meanwhile, after you move the tenderloins over to the cooler side
of the grill, brush the onions and potatoes with the olive oil, sprinkle them
with salt and pepper, and place them on the hotter part of the grill. Cook
until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side for the potatoes and 5 to 7 min­
utes per side for the onions. Transfer the vegetables to a large bowl.
      5. Add the lettuce to the potatoes and onions. Whisk the dressing
well and add it to the bowl, using just enough to moisten the ingredients,
then toss gently.
       6. Place a portion of salad on each plate. Cut the tenderloin into
slices about 1 inch thick, lay several on top of each salad, and serve.




                                                                PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   379
THE CUT

Pork loin back ribs are
                                 Grilled Baby Back Ribs,
known as “baby backs” for
a reason: They are much
                                 Buffalo-Style
smaller than true spareribs.
These ribs come from the                 S E RVE S 6 AS AN APPETI Z E R

blade and center sections
of the loin and are more         We’ve done this before and we’ll do it again, because we really like it: grilling
tender, if less ﬂavorful, than
                                 something and then cutting it up and tossing it in a Buffalo wings mixture. The
spareribs.
                                 combination of the spicy mix and the smoke ﬂavor really works well; in this
                                 case, it makes for an appetizer that people are wild about. You have to use
                                 the baby back ribs here, because they are tender enough to grill in a relatively
                                 short time. Just be sure that you don’t have the ribs directly over the ﬁre while
                                 they’re cooking.
                                         As long as you’ve got the ﬁre going, you might want to stick a couple of
                                 New Potato Hobo Packs (page 442) in the coals to serve alongside the ribs.

                                         2 slabs baby back ribs (20 bones), about 3 pounds total
                                         1⁄ 3   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                         15 dashes Tabasco sauce, or more to taste
                                         1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                         1⁄ 3   cup roughly chopped fresh herbs: any one or a combination of sage,
                                                oregano, thyme, basil, and/or parsley
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         Your favorite blue cheese dressing (optional)
                                         Celery sticks (optional)


                                     1. Start a ﬁre well over to one side of a large kettle grill, using about
                                 enough coals to ﬁll a large shoe box.
                                       2. When the coals are well lit and covered with gray ash, place the
                                 meat on the side of the grill away from the coals, being careful that none
                                 of the meat is directly over the coals. Put the lid on the grill with the vents
                                 open one quarter of the way and cook for 20 minutes. Flip the ribs and
                                 cook them for an additional 20 minutes.
                                      3. Meanwhile, in a large bowl, combine the olive oil, Tabasco, garlic,
                                 herbs, and salt and pepper to taste and mix well.
                                       4. When the ribs are done, remove them from the ﬁre and cut them
                                 apart. Toss them with the sauce mixture to coat thoroughly, then serve
                                 with blue cheese dressing and celery sticks if you want.




380            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Grilled Pork, Bacon, and Mango                                                       THE CUT

                                                                                     Although we usually call

Skewers with Guava-Chile Glaze                                                       for cubes of pork shoulder
                                                                                     meat as the #1 choice for
                                                                                     skewers, here we use the
      S E RVE S 4                                                                    leaner and slightly more
                                                                                     tender loin, since the bacon
Although it may sound a bit weird at ﬁrst, grilled mango is really fantastic. Here   provides plenty of fat and
                                                                                     ﬂavor. The easiest thing to
we combine it with guava, which is a typical ﬂavor pairing in parts of Polynesia,
                                                                                     do is just buy some bone­
where pork is also the meat of choice. To celebrate that, these skewers have a       less pork loin chops about
double dose of pork, with bacon strips as well as cubes of loin.                     an inch thick and cut them
                                                                                     into cubes.
      Try to get slab bacon if you can. Because the bacon won’t cook all the
way through on the skewers, we ﬁrst partially cook it on the stove, then cut it
                                                                                     OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
into pieces for skewering. Once the skewers are on the ﬁre, be careful that          Cubes of any pork shoul­
the bacon doesn’t burn; we are using a slightly cooler ﬁre than usual to help        der meat will also work
with this potential problem, but you may need to move the skewers off to the         very well here. In fact, you
                                                                                     can cut up just about any
side once or twice during cooking.                                                   type of pork, including the
      To keep the Polynesian theme going, serve this with macadamia nuts,            tenderloin, and use it on
rice pilaf, and roasted true yams, which are a large, starchy tuber.                 these skewers. If you ever
                                                                                     see tenderloin tips in the
      FOR THE GLAZE                                                                  supermarket, grab them
                                                                                     and make this dish with
      4 ounces guava jelly
                                                                                     them.
      2 tablespoons fresh lime juice (about 1 lime)
      1 to 2 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice
      1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      4 slices thick-cut slab bacon
      2 pounds boneless pork loin, cut into 1-inch cubes
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      Twelve 1-inch cubes fresh mango (2 mangoes)
      2 red bell peppers, cored, seeded, and cut into 1-inch pieces


      1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

      2. Make the glaze: In a small saucepan, dissolve the guava jelly over
medium heat. When it has turned to liquid, add the lime juice, chiles, and
ginger and stir to combine. Remove from the heat, stir in the cilantro, sea­
son to taste with salt and pepper, and set aside.
      3. In a large sauté pan, cook the bacon over medium heat for 4 to 5
minutes (you don’t want to cook it completely), then drain on paper tow­
els or a brown paper bag and cut into pieces about 1 inch long.



                                                                      PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                381
COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE                   4. Dry the pork cubes with paper towels and sprinkle them gener­
Chop up any leftovers from       ously with salt and pepper. Thread the meat onto skewers, alternating it
this dish into a kind of
                                 with the mango, bacon, and red peppers.
chunky hash and serve it
on top of rice and beans.              5. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you
                                 can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds),
                                 place the kebabs on the grill and cook for 5 to 8 minutes per side for
                                 medium. During the last 30 seconds or so of cooking, brush the kebabs
                                 with the glaze. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4­
                                 inch cut in the thickest part of the meat and take a peek; it should be
                                 slightly less done than you like it. When the meat is done to your liking,
                                 remove the kebabs from the grill, cover them loosely with foil, and allow
                                 them to rest for about 5 minutes.
                                         6. Drizzle the skewers with the remaining glaze and serve.




THE CUT

The relative tenderness of
                                 Grilled Pork and Fig Skewers with
pork makes the exact cut
you use for skewers less
                                 Sun-Dried Tomato–Basil Relish
crucial than with beef. Our
ﬁrst choice, though, is                  S E RVE S 4

boneless pork shoulder,
since it has enough fat to       If you’re looking for a quick and simple recipe with lots of ﬂavor, ideal for a
stay moist over the grilling
ﬁre.
                                 casual weekend cookout, this is an A-#1 candidate. Figs, which go great
                                 with pork in any fashion, are truly wonderful on the grill. Our friend Mike Otten
OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE           liked the Italian-inspired relish so much that he made an extra batch to eat as
Tenderloin tips run a close      a spread on toasted bread. You might want to try that too. It will keep for sev­
second for this recipe—they
                                 eral days, covered and refrigerated.
are extremely tender and
relatively inexpensive, if               Serve this with a Mediterranean White Bean Salad (page 424) and
you can ﬁnd them. You can        maybe a side of pasta with pine nuts and broccoli rabe.
also use cubed boneless
rib chops, although there                FOR THE RELISH
you’re starting to stray into            1⁄ 2   cup thinly sliced sun-dried tomatoes
more expense than it might
                                         1 teaspoon minced garlic
be worth.
                                         1⁄ 2   cup fresh basil leaves, cut into long thin slices
                                         1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                         1 ⁄4   cup pine nuts, toasted in a 350°F oven for 5 minutes (shake the pan
                                                frequently)
                                         2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




382            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     2 pounds boneless pork butt or other pork shoulder cut, cut into 1-inch
        cubes
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     8 fresh ﬁgs
     1 red onion, peeled and cut into 1-inch chunks
     3 tablespoons olive oil


     1. Light a ﬁre in your grill.

      2. In a small bowl, combine all the relish ingredients and mix well;
set aside.
      3. Dry the pork cubes with paper towels and sprinkle them gener­
ously with salt and pepper. Thread onto skewers, alternating the pork with
the ﬁgs and onion cubes. Brush the kebabs lightly with the olive oil.
      4. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you
can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds),
cook the skewers for 3 to 4 minutes per side (a total of 12 to 16 minutes)
for medium. To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch
cut in the thickest part of the meat and take a peek; it should be slightly
less done than you like it. When the meat is done to your liking, remove
the skewers from the grill, cover loosely with foil, and let the meat rest for
5 minutes.
       5. Leave the kebabs assembled or slide the ingredients off onto a plat­
ter, and serve with the relish.




                                                                  PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   383
THE CUT

A pork leg (fresh ham) cen­
                                 BBQ-Rubbed Grilled Fresh Ham
ter slice is basically a
cross-section of the hind
                                 Center Slice with Watermelon-
leg of the hog, the part that
is usually smoked or cured       Pineapple Salad
to become a ham. To get a
piece this thick, you’re deﬁ­            S E RVE S 4 TO 6

nitely going to have to call
your butcher. But it’s worth     This is a pretty straight-up barbecue-style approach that we apply to a non­
it, because this is a neat
cut of meat. Like the whole
                                 traditional cut. What we’re using is a thick slice from the part of the hog that
fresh ham, it is tender and      is usually made into ham. My (Doc’s) grandmother occasionally used to make
very sweet and juicy. (If you    a very thin version of this cut that she called ham steak and served with pan
can’t get this cut, though,
go ahead and make the
                                 gravy, a dish that is still on the menu in family-style restaurants throughout the
recipe using any of the          Midwest. But here we’re using a much thicker piece of pork. After rubbing the
substitutes suggested            meat with a standard barbecue spice rub, we sear it really well over a hot ﬁre,
here.)
                                 then ﬁnish it up over a cooler ﬁre. It tastes great, has excellent texture, and is

OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
                                 fun to serve, because few people use this cut of meat, so they’re usually sur­
Country-style ribs are a         prised by it. If you have a favorite BBQ sauce, go ahead and brush it on the
great substitute here, since     pork when it comes off the grill if you like.
they belong to that rela­
                                         We both had grandfathers who liked to eat watermelon with salt and
tively exclusive category of
cuts that respond well both      pepper on it, so savory watermelon salads are favorites of ours. This one, with
to slow moist cooking and        the sweet pineapple and the tartness of fresh lime juice and red wine vinegar,
to quick high-heat cooking
                                 is a particularly refreshing version and goes great with the grill-barbecued pork.
on the grill. Loin blade
chops and loin sirloin                   Serve this with thick slices of grilled bread and Creamed Corn (page
chops also work well here,       433).
and relatively thin center-
cut loin chops would also
be ﬁne. If you use any of                FOR THE BBQ RUB

these substitutes, you’ll                1 ⁄4   cup paprika
need 8 ribs or chops, each               2 tablespoons sugar
weighing about 6 ounces
                                         2 tablespoons ground cumin
and about 3 ⁄4 inch thick.
                                         2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
                                         2 tablespoons kosher salt
                                         2 tablespoons chile powder


                                         One 2-pound pork leg (fresh ham) center slice, about 1 inch thick

                                         FOR THE SALAD

                                         11 ⁄ 2 cups seeded large watermelon chunks
                                         11 ⁄ 2 cups large pineapple chunks
                                         1 red onion, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced
                                         2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh oregano (or substitute fresh parsley)




384            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
         11 ⁄4 cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes)                              COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

         2 tablespoons red wine vinegar                                          Slice up any leftover pork,
                                                                                 put it between two slices of
         Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste
                                                                                 bread, slather on a little
                                                                                 barbecue sauce, and that’s
      1. Using about enough coals to ﬁll a large shoe box, light a two-level     one great sandwich right
ﬁre in your grill, putting about three quarters of the coals on one side and     there. Or you can just
                                                                                 brown the meat in a frying
one quarter on the other side.
                                                                                 pan and eat it with eggs for
         2. Make the rub: Combine all the ingredients in a small bowl and mix    a hearty breakfast.

well.
      3. Dry the pork with paper towels and rub it generously with the bar­
becue rub. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals in the hotter part of
the grill are medium-hot (you can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill
surface for 3 to 4 seconds), place the pork over the hot part of the ﬁre.
Cook until it is well seared on both sides, 4 to 5 minutes per side. Move the
meat to the cooler side of the grill, cover it with a metal pie pan or dispos­
able aluminum pie pan, and cook until tender, about 5 minutes per side.
To check for doneness, nick, peek, and cheat: Make a 1⁄4-inch cut in the
thickest part of the meat and take a peek; it should be slightly less done
than you like it. When the meat is done, remove it from the heat, cover it
loosely with foil, and let it rest for 5 minutes before serving.
      4. Meanwhile, make the salad: In a large bowl, combine all the ingre­
dients and toss gently.
         5. Cut the ham slice into thick wedges and serve accompanied by the
salad.




                                                                PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                 385
                             RECIPES FOR
                             SMALL TOUGH CUTS OF PORK
10 STEPS TO GREAT PORK       Orange-Stewed Country-Style Pork Ribs with Sweet-and-Sour
STEWS
                             Red Cabbage Slaw
 1. Dry the meat cubes.

 2. Season the meat
                             West Indies–Style Pork Stew with Plantains, Lime, and Chiles
    cubes generously.
                             Spicy Pork Stew with Tomatoes and Okra over Jalapeño-
 3. Brown the meat cubes     Cheddar Grits
    well, in batches if
    necessary.
                             Mango-Stewed Pork with Fried Sweet Potatoes
 4. Remove the meat from
    the pot, adjust the      Fragrant Winter Pork Stew with Fennel, Pears, and
    amount of fat in the     Sauerkraut
    pot, and sauté the
    aromatics and            Malaysian-Inspired Pork Stew with Coconut Milk and
    vegetables.
                             Aromatic Garnishes
 5. Deglaze the pot with
    some of the liquid.      Spicy Stewed Pork with Eggplant, Chiles, and Sesame Spinach

 6. Return the meat to the   Gingered Pork Curry with Seven Garnishes
    pot along with enough
    liquid to cover.

 7. Bring to a simmer and
    skim off any ﬁlm, then
    reduce the heat to low
    and simmer gently.

 8. Check for doneness
    early and often.

 9. Skim the ﬁlm and fat
    from the liquid.

10. Add any ﬁnal
    seasonings, season to
    taste with salt and
    pepper again, and
    serve.




386
Orange-Stewed Country-Style                                                         THE CUT

                                                                                    Country-style ribs are the

Pork Ribs with Sweet-and-Sour                                                       section of the pork loin
                                                                                    nearest the shoulder, cut

Red Cabbage Slaw                                                                    into chops that are then
                                                                                    split in half. You will ﬁnd
                                                                                    them both boneless
      S E RVE S 4                                                                   and with the rib section
                                                                                    attached. Either way, they
Despite their name, country-style ribs are actually a form of chop. Because they    have quite a bit of fat
                                                                                    and gnarl, which makes
have a good deal of fat as well as a piece of bone, they are great for long, slow   them ideal for long, slow
cooking methods like stewing. As an added advantage, they are quite cheap.          cooking.
      We really like Latin ﬂavors with pork, and this dish has plenty of them,
with the sour orange, chipotles, and cumin ﬂavoring the stewed liquid. Chipo­       OTHER NAMES

                                                                                    Country ribs.
tles, which are dried, smoked jalapeños, are worth seeking out. We like the
canned version in adobo sauce, which is a vinegary liquid that keeps the pep­
                                                                                    OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
pers moist.                                                                         In this recipe, you can eas­
      We would serve this with Latin-Style Black Beans and Rice (page 422)          ily substitute loin blade
and Fried Plantains (page 56) or corn on the cob.                                   chops, which are essen­
                                                                                    tially chops that are taken
                                                                                    from the same part of the
      3 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
                                                                                    pork loin as country-style
      8 country-style pork ribs, about 6 ounces each                                ribs but that have not been
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                         split. Pork shoulder coun­
      3 tablespoons ground cumin                                                    try-style ribs, from the por­
                                                                                    tion of the shoulder closest
      2 large red onions, peeled and thinly sliced
                                                                                    to the loin, are very similar
      2 tablespoons minced garlic                                                   to regular country-style ribs
      1 to 3 tablespoons minced canned chipotle peppers in adobo, according to      but have a bit more fat and
         your taste for heat                                                        connective tissue, so they
      1 cup orange juice                                                            also are a good substitute.
      1⁄ 2
                                                                                    Arm chops from the foreleg
             cup red wine vinegar
                                                                                    of the hog, often called pic­
      One 12-ounce bottle beer, or more as needed                                   nic steaks, will also work
                                                                                    well.
      F OR TH E S LAW
      1⁄ 2   cup fresh lime juice (about 4 limes)
      1 tablespoon dark brown sugar
      1 tablespoon ground coriander
      1⁄ 2   head red cabbage, ﬁnely shredded
      1 cup fresh diced pineapple
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro


      1. In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot
but not smoking. Dry the ribs with paper towels, sprinkle them generously with



                                                                   PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                 387
                                 salt and pepper, and rub them all over with the cumin. Add them to the pan in a
                                 single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and cook until well
                                 browned, 4 to 5 minutes per side; transfer the ribs to a platter as they are done.
                                       2. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pan as needed so you have a total
                                 of about 2 tablespoons in the pan. Add the onions and cook, stirring occa­
                                 sionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic and chiles
                                 and cook, stirring, for 1 minute more.
                                       3. Return the ribs to the pan and add the orange juice, vinegar, and
                                 beer. (The liquid should cover the ribs; if it does not, add beer to cover.)
                                 Bring to a simmer and skim any ﬁlm from the top of the liquid, then
                                 reduce the heat to low, cover, and cook until the ribs are very tender, 50
                                 minutes to 11⁄ 2 hours.
                                       4. While the ribs are cooking, make the slaw: Combine the lime
                                 juice, brown sugar, and coriander in a small bowl. In a large bowl, com­
                                 bine the cabbage and diced pineapple. Pour the dressing over the cabbage
                                 mixture and mix well. Season with salt and pepper, then cover and refrig­
                                 erate until serving time.
                                       5. When the ribs are done, remove them from the pan, cover them
                                 loosely with foil, and set them aside. Skim the fat from the stewing liquid.
                                 Taste the liquid, and if it needs more ﬂavor, continue to simmer to reduce.
                                 For a thicker sauce, reduce it until it coats the back of a spoon. Stir in the
                                 cilantro and season with salt and pepper.
                                       6. Serve the ribs topped with some of the sauce, passing the slaw on
                                 the side.




THE CUT

See Spicy Pork Stew with
                                 West Indies–Style Pork Stew with
Tomatoes and Okra (page
390) for details on pork
                                 Plantains, Lime, and Chiles
stew meat and other cuts
you can use in this recipe.              S E RVE S 6



                                 Full of vibrant Caribbean ﬂavors, this stew is another demonstration of the pri­
                                 macy of pork in cuisines throughout much of the hot-weather world. If you don’t
                                 have access to plantains, you can substitute sweet potatoes in this recipe, but
                                 before you do so, be sure to check out any Latin markets in your area. They are
                                 certain to have not only plantains but also a number of interesting root vegeta­
                                 bles that you may not be familiar with but that bear investigation.


388            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      Serve this with Latin-Style Black Beans and Rice (page 422) or Spicy
Latin Black Beans (page 423), maybe fried yucca, and a side of ripe man­
goes with lime juice.

      1 ⁄4   cup olive oil, or more if needed
      2 pounds boneless pork shoulder, cut into 2-inch cubes
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      2 medium onions, peeled and diced small
      1 tablespoon minced garlic
      2 tablespoons cumin seeds (or 1 tablespoon ground cumin)
      1 to 3 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice, depending
         on your taste for heat
      6 plum tomatoes, roughly chopped
      About 11 ⁄ 2 cups chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
      1 cup orange juice
      1⁄ 2   cup red wine vinegar
      1 ⁄4   cup dark rum
      2 tablespoons dark brown sugar
      2 slightly ripe plantains, peeled and cut into chunks
      1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh oregano
      2 limes, cut into 6 wedges each


      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
heat the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Dry
the pork with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with salt and pepper.
Add it to the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding,
and cook until well browned on all sides, about 15 minutes total; transfer
the pieces to a platter as they are done.
       2. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons left in the pot. Add the onions and cook, stirring
occasionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic, cumin,
and chiles and cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Add the tomatoes and cook,
stirring, for 1 minute more.
      3. Return the pork to the pot and add the stock, orange juice, vine­
gar, rum, brown sugar, and salt and pepper to taste. (If there is not enough
liquid to completely cover the ingredients, add more stock.) Bring to a sim­
mer, cover, and cook for 30 minutes. Add the plantains and continue cook­
ing, stirring occasionally, until the sauce thickens and the pork is tender,
about 11⁄ 2 hours more. When the pork is fork-tender, stir in the oregano
and season with salt and pepper.
     4. Serve the stew over plain white rice, with the lime wedges for
squeezing.


                                                                    PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   389
THE CUT

While you sometimes ﬁnd
                                 Spicy Pork Stew with Tomatoes
cubed “pork for stew” in
supermarkets, it is not as
                                 and Okra over Jalapeño-Cheddar
common as veal or beef
stew meat. This is actually      Grits
somewhat of an advantage,
because it forces you to                 S E RVE S 6

buy a cut of meat and cube
it up yourself. This in turn     With its pork, okra, and tomatoes and its ﬂavorings of garlic, paprika, and
means you will be getting
the cut that is best for
                                 cayenne (plus ﬁlé gumbo if you can ﬁnd it), this dish has strong Creole-style
stewing, rather than cubes       roots. So it has plenty of ﬂavors going on, and to add to the mix, we serve it
from an assortment of cuts,      over that old Southern favorite, grits, with Cheddar cheese and jalapeños.
what you are most likely to
get when you buy precut
                                         Now, we know that some of you out there will be tempted to avoid this
stew meat.                       recipe because you don’t like okra. Don’t. You can leave it out and still have a
   As with beef, we prefer       great dish, or you can go ahead and add the okra and you’ll probably ﬁnd that
pork from the shoulder
area for stewing. Because
                                 it tastes a lot better than you thought. The key is to buy small pods, no longer
this section of the animal       than two inches, which are both tender and tasty.
gets a lot of exercise, it has           All you need to make this a meal is a green salad and maybe some corn
a good deal of connective
tissue, which translates to
                                 bread.
ﬂavor during long, slow
cooking. It also has enough              3 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
fat to stay moist over the               2 pounds boneless pork shoulder, cut into 2-inch cubes
course of the cooking. So                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
any of the shoulder cuts—
                                         2 onions, peeled and diced small
most of which will have the
word “Boston” in the                     3 tablespoons minced garlic
name—are ﬁne: pork butt,                 1 tablespoon paprika
Boston butt, boneless
                                         1 tablespoon cayenne pepper
Boston shoulder, boneless
shoulder blade, or just                  2 tablespoons gumbo ﬁlé powder (optional)
Boston butt. Cuts with the               6 plum tomatoes, peeled, cored, and diced medium
word “picnic” in the name,               3 cups chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
such as picnic shoulder,
                                         1 pound small okra (the pods no larger than 2 inches long), cut into 1-inch
which come from farther
                                            pieces (or substitute frozen okra)
down the leg, are tougher
but also ﬁne for stew meat.              2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh thyme (or 1 teaspoon dried thyme)
                                         2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh oregano (or 1 teaspoon dried
                                            oregano)

                                         FOR THE GRITS

                                         4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter
                                         1 small onion, peeled and diced small
                                         1 to 3 minced jalapeño chiles, depending on your taste for heat
                                         11 ⁄ 2 cups fresh corn (from 3 ears)
                                         4 cups water




390            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1⁄ 2   teaspoon kosher salt, plus more to taste                              OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE

      1 cup quick-cooking grits                                                    Pork is inherently more
      1⁄ 2                                                                         tender than beef. That
             cup grated sharp Cheddar cheese
                                                                                   means that, unlike beef
      Freshly cracked black pepper to taste                                        round, meat from the rear
                                                                                   leg of the hog, also known
      1. In a 5-inch deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot, heat the oil        as fresh ham, is excellent
                                                                                   when cut into cubes for
over medium-high heat until very hot but not smoking. Dry the pork well
                                                                                   stew meat. Country-style
with paper towels and sprinkle it generously with salt and pepper. Add it          ribs or blade chops, both of
to the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and       which are fashioned from
brown well on all sides, 12 to 15 minutes in all; transfer the pieces to a plat­   the section of the loin right
                                                                                   next to the shoulder, are
ter as they are done.
                                                                                   also excellent substitutes—
      2. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have about 2      and the ribs have the
                                                                                   added advantage of being
tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions and cook, stirring occasionally,            readily available.
until golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the garlic, paprika, cayenne,
and ﬁlé powder, if using, and cook, stirring, for 1 minute more.                   COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE

                                                                                   Like all stews, this one will
      3. Return the pork to the pot and add the tomatoes and chicken
                                                                                   taste great as leftovers. If
stock. Bring to a simmer and cook, uncovered, stirring from time to time,          you have leftover grits, you
until the sauce thickens and the pork is tender, about 11⁄ 2 hours. Add the        can treat them like polenta:
okra and simmer for 20 minutes more. Stir in the herbs and season with             Cut them into squares and
                                                                                   fry them in a little oil, then
salt and pepper.
                                                                                   serve them topped with
       4. Meanwhile, after you add the okra to the stew, start making the          tomato sauce.

grits: In a medium sauté pan over medium heat, melt 2 tablespoons of but­
ter. Add the onion and sauté, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9
minutes. Add the chiles and corn and cook, stirring, for 1 minute more.
Remove from the heat and set aside.
      5. Bring the water to a boil in a medium saucepan over high heat.
Add the salt and, stirring constantly, sprinkle the grits into the water.
Reduce the heat to low, cover, and cook for about 5 minutes, stirring once.
Remove the pan from the heat and stir in the sautéed onion and corn mix­
ture, the cheese, and the remaining 2 tablespoons butter. Season with salt
and pepper.
      6. Serve the grits in individual bowls, topped with the pork stew.




                                                                  PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                   391
THE CUT

See Spicy Pork Stew with
                                 Mango-Stewed Pork with Fried
Tomatoes and Okra (page
390) for details on pork
                                 Sweet Potatoes
stew meat and other cuts
you can use in this recipe.              S E RVE S 6



                                 We really like the combination of mango, pork, and coriander; it’s a trio in
                                 which each ingredient seems to set off the other, bringing out real depths of
                                 ﬂavor. Since this recipe takes its inspiration from the French-speaking islands
                                 of the Caribbean, where curry is popular, we also add a little curry powder to
                                 the mix.
                                         Don’t forget that when the stew has been cooking for a while, you need
                                 to put the sweet potatoes in the oven so they can cook at the same time.
                                 These potatoes are simple to make and really taste great—we’re pretty sure
                                 that once you’ve made them, you’ll be serving them with plenty of other
                                 dishes too.
                                         We don’t like to say that a dish “demands” or “cries out for” something,
                                 because food can’t talk. But if we did, we would say that this dish “demands”
                                 to be served with Latin-Style Black Beans and Rice (page 422), because
                                 they are perfect together.

                                         2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                         1 tablespoon red pepper ﬂakes, or to taste
                                         3 tablespoons cracked coriander seeds
                                         2 pounds boneless pork shoulder, cut into 1-inch cubes
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         5 tablespoons olive oil
                                         2 large red onions, peeled and thinly sliced
                                         2 red bell peppers, cored, seeded, and thinly sliced
                                         3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                         2 small mangoes, peeled and diced large (2 cups)
                                         1 cup mango juice (or substitute orange juice)
                                         About 1 cup dry white wine
                                         1 ⁄4   cup red wine vinegar
                                         2 tablespoons curry powder
                                         1 tablespoon dark brown sugar

                                         F O R T H E S W E E T P O TA T O E S

                                         2 large sweet potatoes
                                         1 ⁄4   cup vegetable oil
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




392            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      1. In a small bowl, combine the garlic, red pepper ﬂakes, and corian­
der and mix well. Dry the pork with paper towels, sprinkle it generously
with salt and pepper, and toss with the spice mixture.
       2. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
heat 3 tablespoons of the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not
smoking. Add the pork in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid
crowding, and cook until it is well browned on all sides, about 15 minutes
in all; as the meat is browned, transfer it to a platter.
      3. Discard the oil in the pot. Add the remaining 2 tablespoons oil to
the pot and heat over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add
the onions and peppers and sauté, stirring occasionally, until the onions
are golden brown, 11 to 13 minutes. Add the ginger and mangoes and
sauté, stirring, for 3 minutes more.
      4. Return the meat to the pot and add the mango juice, wine, vine­
gar, curry powder, and sugar. (If the liquid does not completely cover the
ingredients, add enough wine so that it does.) Bring to a simmer and skim
any ﬁlm off the top of the liquid, then cover, reduce the heat to low, and
cook gently until the meat is tender, about 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours.
      5. When the pork has been cooking for about 1 hour, preheat the
oven to 350°F. Place the sweet potatoes on a small baking sheet and bake
until they can be easily pierced with a fork or skewer but still offer some
resistance, 30 to 45 minutes. Remove the potatoes from the oven and allow
them to cool slightly. As soon as they are cool enough to handle, cut them
lengthwise into quarters; set aside.
      6. When the stew is almost done, heat the vegetable oil in a large
sauté pan over medium-high heat until it is very hot but not smoking. Add
the sweet potatoes and fry until they are brown and crisp, 5 to 8 minutes.
Season generously with salt and pepper.
     7. Serve the pork covered with the sauce, accompanied by the sweet
potatoes.




                                                              PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   393
THE CUT

See Spicy Pork Stew with
                                 Fragrant Winter Pork Stew with
Tomatoes and Okra (page
390) for details on pork
                                 Fennel, Pears, and Sauerkraut
stew meat and other cuts
you can use in this recipe.              S E RVE S 6 TO 8



                                 With caraway seeds, allspice berries, sauerkraut, and pears, this dish is full of
                                 Eastern European ﬂavors. We think of it as a variation on goulash, that classic
                                 Hungarian stew more frequently made with beef. As with other pork stews,
                                 you can buy a piece of boneless pork shoulder and cube it up yourself, which
                                 is the best option, or you can simply buy packaged pork stew meat, which will
                                 also work ﬁne.
                                         Unlike other stews, this one is actually best served the day it is made,
                                 because the fennel and pears soften overnight. Serve this with a hot German
                                 potato salad, Baked Stuffed Potatoes (page 415), or a wedge of iceberg let­
                                 tuce topped with Thousand Island dressing.

                                         6 ounces slab bacon, rind removed and diced small (or substitute 6 to 8
                                            slices regular bacon)
                                         2 pounds pork shoulder, trimmed of fat and cut into 2-inch cubes
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         2 large onions, peeled and diced small
                                         2 large fennel bulbs, fronds removed, cored, and thinly sliced
                                         2 cups dry white wine
                                         1 pound sauerkraut, rinsed and drained
                                         2 tablespoons caraway seeds
                                         6 allspice berries (or 1 teaspoon ground allspice)
                                         3 bay leaves
                                         About 2 cups chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                         3 pears, peeled, cored, diced large, and tossed with juice of 1 ⁄ 2 lemon to
                                            prevent browning
                                         1⁄ 2   cup sour cream
                                         1⁄ 2   cup grainy mustard


                                       1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
                                 cook the bacon slowly over medium heat until it is crisp and golden
                                 brown, 6 to 8 minutes. Transfer the cooked bacon to a large bowl, leaving
                                 the fat in the pot.
                                      2. Dry the pork well with paper towels and sprinkle it generously
                                 with salt and pepper. Raise the heat to medium-high and add the pork to
                                 the pot in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding, and




394            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
cook until well browned on all sides, about 15 minutes; transfer the pieces
to the bowl with the bacon as they are done.
     3. When all the pork has been browned, pour off all but 2 table­
spoons of fat from the pot, add the onions and fennel, and cook, stirring
occasionally, until the onions are translucent, 9 to 11 minutes. Add the
wine and bring to a simmer, stirring to dissolve the brown crusty stuff in
the bottom of the pot.
      4. Return the pork and bacon to the pot and add the sauerkraut, car­
away seeds, allspice, bay leaves, and stock. (If the liquid does not cover all
the other ingredients, add enough stock to cover.) Bring to a simmer, skim
any ﬁlm off the surface, then cover, reduce the heat to low, and simmer
gently for 1 hour. Add the pears, then continue to cook until the meat is
fork-tender, 30 minutes to 1 hour more.
     5. Meanwhile, in a small bowl, combine the sour cream and mustard
and mix well.
     6. Serve the stew in shallow bowls, garnishing each with a dollop of
the mustard cream.




                                                                PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   395
THE CUT

See Spicy Pork Stew with
                                 Malaysian-Inspired Pork Stew
Tomatoes and Okra (page
390) for details on pork
                                 with Coconut Milk and Aromatic
stew meat and other cuts
you can use in this recipe.      Garnishes
                                         S E RVE S 6



                                 In Southeast Asia, soups and stews are a big part of any cook’s repertoire.
                                 This particular version is inspired by the ﬂavors of Malaysia, where over the
                                 centuries cooks of Malay, Indian, and Chinese backgrounds have created a
                                 unique cuisine. With lots of garlic, a bit of curry powder, coconut milk, and the
                                 Southeast Asian herb trio of basil, mint, and cilantro, it hits a lot of taste buds
                                 with every bite.
                                         Make sure that you use unsweetened coconut milk, which is made by
                                 steeping fresh coconut meat in hot water and then straining it, rather than the
                                 sweetened product used in tropical drinks. Cans of the unsweetened version
                                 are available in most Asian groceries and many supermarkets–or you can
                                 make your own. To do so, place equal quantities of coconut meat and boiling
                                 water in a food processor or blender, puree, strain the resulting mixture
                                 through cheesecloth, and discard the solids—and you’ve got your coconut
                                 milk.
                                         This stew is great with white rice and a salad that includes one or more
                                 of the bitter Asian greens like tatsoi, mizuna, or baby mustard greens. If you
                                 can’t get any of those greens, try using some arugula or dandelion greens in
                                 the salad along with regular lettuce.

                                         3 tablespoons ﬁnely minced garlic
                                         2 tablespoons curry powder
                                         2 tablespoons ground cumin
                                         1 tablespoon paprika
                                         1 tablespoon cayenne pepper, or less to taste
                                         2 pounds boneless pork shoulder, cut into 1-inch cubes
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                         5 tablespoons olive oil
                                         2 large red onions, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced
                                         3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                         3 plum tomatoes, cored and diced small
                                         1 ⁄4   cup soy sauce
                                         11 ⁄4 cups unsweetened coconut milk
                                         1 cup dry white wine




396            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     FOR THE GARNISH
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh basil
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh mint
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
     1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped roasted unsalted peanuts
     3 tablespoons fresh lime juice (about 11 ⁄ 2 limes)
     5 dashes Tabasco sauce, or to taste
     1 teaspoon brown sugar


      1. In a large bowl, combine the garlic, curry powder, cumin, paprika,
and cayenne pepper and mix well. Dry the pork cubes with paper towels,
sprinkle them generously with salt and pepper, add to the bowl with the
spice mixture, and toss to coat well.
      2. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
heat 3 tablespoons of the oil over medium-high heat until very hot but not
smoking. Add the pork in a single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid
crowding, and cook until it is well browned on all sides, about 10 minutes;
transfer the meat to a platter as it is done.
      3. Discard the oil in the pot, add the remaining 2 tablespoons olive
oil, and heat over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the
onions and sauté, stirring occasionally, until golden brown, 11 to 13 min­
utes. Add the ginger and tomatoes and cook, stirring, for 2 minutes more.
      4. Return the meat to the pot and add the soy sauce, coconut milk,
and wine. (The liquid should just cover the dry ingredients; if it does not,
add a bit more wine—but don’t overdo it, because the tomatoes will add
liquid as they cook.) Bring to a simmer and skim any ﬁlm off the surface,
then cover, reduce the heat to low, and cook gently until the meat is very
tender, 11⁄ 2 to 2 hours.
     5. In a small bowl, combine the garnish ingredients and mix well.

      6. Place a generous helping of the stew in each bowl, top with a cou­
ple of tablespoons of the garnish, and serve hot.




                                                              PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   397
THE CUT

See Spicy Pork Stew with
                                 Spicy Stewed Pork with Eggplant,
Tomatoes and Okra (page
390) for details on pork
                                 Chiles, and Sesame Spinach
stew meat and other cuts
you can use in this recipe.              S E RVE S 4



                                 To us, pork seems like the most versatile of the red meats. It matches up very
                                 well with ﬂavor footprints from around the world, particularly from Asia. Here
                                 we take advantage of that by stewing pork cubes in a mixture of soy sauce,
                                 vinegar, and white wine that we ﬂavor with garlic, ginger, and red pepper
                                 ﬂakes, with some cilantro added at the end for freshness and some peanuts
                                 for crunch. Eggplant not only adds its own ﬂavor, but helps to thicken the
                                 stew as well. When you look at the eggplant before cooking it, you may think
                                 you have too much, but don’t worry—it will cook down just right.
                                         You can skip the sesame spinach if you like, but we really like the con­
                                 trasting freshness it provides to the long-cooked stew—and it doesn’t take
                                 much time to prepare.
                                         Serve this over white rice.

                                         3 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
                                         1 pound pork shoulder, cut into 1-inch cubes
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked white pepper to taste (or substitute black
                                           pepper)
                                         2 tablespoons minced garlic
                                         3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                         1 tablespoon red pepper ﬂakes
                                         1 red onion, peeled and diced small
                                         1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced small
                                         1 large eggplant, peeled and diced small
                                         1 tablespoon sugar
                                         1 ⁄4   cup white vinegar
                                         1 ⁄4   cup soy sauce
                                         About 1 ⁄ 2 cup dry white wine

                                         FOR TH E S PI NACH

                                         2 tablespoons sesame oil
                                         1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                         1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger
                                         11 ⁄ 2 pounds spinach, trimmed, well washed, and dried
                                         2 tablespoons white or rice wine vinegar
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked white pepper to taste (or substitute black
                                           pepper)




398            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped roasted unsalted peanuts


       1. In your largest sauté pan, heat the olive oil over medium-high heat
until very hot but not smoking. Dry the pork well with paper towels and
sprinkle it generously with salt and white pepper, then add to the pan and
cook, stirring occasionally, until browned on all sides, about 12 to 15 min­
utes. Add the garlic, ginger, and red pepper ﬂakes and continue to cook,
stirring, for 1 minute more. Transfer the pork to a platter.
      2. Add oil or pour off the fat from the pan so you have about 2 table­
spoons in the pan. Return the pan to medium-high heat, add the onion,
bell pepper, and eggplant, and cook, stirring occasionally, until the onion is
golden, 11 to 13 minutes.
      3. Return the pork to the pan and add the sugar, vinegar, soy sauce,
and white wine. (The liquid should cover all of the ingredients; if it does
not, add more wine or water.) Bring to a simmer, skim any ﬁlm from the
surface, then reduce the heat, cover, and cook until the pork is fork-tender,
about 11⁄ 2 hours. Season with salt and pepper.
      4. Meanwhile, when the stew is almost done, make the spinach: In a
large sauté pan, heat the sesame oil over medium-high heat until hot but
not smoking. Add the garlic and ginger and stir once, then add the spinach
and sear it for about 1 minute, stirring constantly. Add the vinegar and toss
two or three times, then remove the pan from the heat and season the
spinach with salt and white pepper.
      5. Serve the stew in bowls, sprinkling each bowl with cilantro and
chopped peanuts, and either serve the spinach separately or lay a generous
helping of spinach on top of each bowl of the stew, over to one side.




                                                                PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   399
THE CUT

See Spicy Pork Stew with
                                 Gingered Pork Curry with Seven
Tomatoes and Okra (page
390) for details on pork
                                 Garnishes
stew meat and other cuts
you can use in this recipe.              S E RVE S 6



                                 One of the cool things about ordering curries in Indian restaurants when we
                                 were younger was that sometimes you got lots of little bowls of garnishes—
                                 peanuts, currants, coconut, bottled Major Grey’s chutney, and so on—to add
                                 as you liked. When we got older and started doing some traveling in Asia, we
                                 found this to be a very common approach in that part of the world. In much of
                                 Southeast Asia, for example, platters of whole herb leaves and freshly sliced
                                 vegetables are routinely set out for adding to soups and stews.
                                         Here we take that approach in a dish that we have chosen to call a
                                 “curry” because it contains many of the spices typically present in dishes
                                 known by that name in the West. The dish also includes ﬁsh sauce, a fer­
                                 mented ﬁsh product that is an important part of the ﬂavor footprint of South­
                                 east Asia. Don’t be put off by the smell of uncooked ﬁsh sauce. It mellows as
                                 it cooks, and it actually works much like salt, deepening the ﬂavor of the dish
                                 without having a distinct taste presence of its own. Of course, you can leave
                                 it out if you want; in that case, substitute soy sauce in the jalapeño garnish.

                                         3 tablespoons olive oil, or more if needed
                                         2 pounds boneless pork shoulder, cut into 1-inch cubes
                                         Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper
                                         2 small red onions, peeled and diced small
                                         1 to 3 tablespoons minced red chile peppers of your choice
                                         1 red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced small
                                         1 green bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced small
                                         3 tablespoons minced garlic
                                         3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                         3 plum tomatoes, cored and diced small
                                         1 tablespoon ground cumin
                                         1⁄ 2   teaspoon turmeric
                                         1 tablespoon paprika
                                         2 tablespoons ground coriander
                                         2 tablespoons freshly cracked white pepper (or substitute black pepper)
                                         2 stalks lemongrass, chopped into several large pieces (so you can remove
                                            them after cooking)
                                         3 tablespoons Thai ﬁsh sauce (nam pla)
                                         About 1 cup chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)




400            H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1⁄ 2   cup dry white wine                                                      COOK ONCE, EAT TWICE
     1⁄ 2   cup pineapple juice                                                     While stews are excellent
                                                                                    “make-ahead-and-reheat”
     FOR THE GARNISHES                                                              dishes, the wild array of ﬂa­
     5 jalapeño peppers, cut into very thin rounds                                  vors in this one make it
     1 ⁄4                                                                           particularly well suited to
            cup Thai ﬁsh sauce (nam pla)
                                                                                    that approach. Prepare a
     1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped roasted unsalted peanuts                            new batch of the varied
     1⁄ 2   cup grated unsweetened coconut, toasted in a small sauté pan, shaking   garnishes just before you
            frequently, until aromatic, 3 to 4 minutes                              serve the stew, and they
     1⁄ 2   cup fresh cilantro leaves                                               will add a layer of fresh
     1⁄ 2                                                                           ﬂavors.
            cup fresh mint leaves
     1⁄ 2   cup thinly sliced scallions (white and green parts)
     3 limes, quartered


      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
heat the oil over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Dry the
pork and sprinkle it generously with salt and pepper. Add it to the pot in a
single layer, in batches if necessary to avoid crowding and cook until well
browned on all sides, about 15 minutes total; transfer the pieces to a plat­
ter as they are done.
      2. Pour off the fat or add oil to the pot as needed so you have a total
of about 2 tablespoons in the pot. Add the onions, chiles, and bell peppers
to the pot and cook, stirring occasionally, until the onions are translucent,
7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic, ginger, and tomatoes and cook, stirring, for
2 minutes. Add the cumin, turmeric, paprika, coriander, 2 tablespoons salt,
the white pepper, and lemongrass and cook, stirring constantly, for 3 min­
utes longer.
      3. Return the pork to the pot and add the ﬁsh sauce, chicken stock,
wine, and pineapple juice. (If there is not enough liquid to completely
cover the ingredients, add more stock.) Bring to a simmer, skim any ﬁlm
from the surface, then reduce the heat to low and simmer gently until the
pork is fork-tender, 1 to 11⁄ 2 hours. When the meat is done, remove and dis­
card the lemongrass.
      4. Prepare the garnishes: In a small bowl, combine the jalapeños with
the ﬁsh sauce and stir to mix well. Place each of the remaining garnishes in
a small bowl.
     5. Serve the curry over bowls of steaming white rice, and let your
guests help themselves to the garnishes.




                                                                    PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                401
      RECIPES FOR
      ODD CUTS OF PORK: OFFAL ET AL.

      Pot Likker–Braised Fresh Ham Hocks with Collard Greens
      and Potatoes

      Smoked Ham Hocks with Indian-Spiced Green
      Split Peas




402
Pot Likker–Braised Fresh Ham                                                       THE CUT

                                                                                   What you want to use here

Hocks with Collard Greens and                                                      is a fresh hock from the
                                                                                   front leg of the hog. This is

Potatoes                                                                           the same part of the animal
                                                                                   as the shank of the veal,
                                                                                   and it is actually some­
      S E RVE S 8                                                                  times called a pork shank.
                                                                                   It is a tough piece of meat,
This dish is worth making for the pot likker alone. That’s the name given to the   with a lot of connective tis­
                                                                                   sue and a fair amount of
liquid that collard greens have been cooked in, and it has always been one of      internal fat, but, like other
my (Chris’s) favorite things. In fact, I’ve long been a big fan of greens, but     cuts of this nature, it has a
recently my appreciation for their proven track record with regards to both        tremendous amount of ﬂa­
                                                                                   vor. While it is very often
health and ﬂavor has taken a quantum leap. Make this dish in the middle of         smoked, you can ﬁnd it
the winter with some corn bread to sop up the leftover pot likker, and you will    fresh in many butcher
have a hearty, delicious, down-home treat.                                         shops, and to us, the fresh
                                                                                   version has a little nicer ﬂa­
      FOR THE GREENS                                                               vor. It is very rich and, when
                                                                                   cooked by slow moist heat,
      2 pounds collard greens, stemmed and well washed (or substitute turnip
         greens or kale)                                                           ends up with a cool silky
                                                                                   texture. Be sure you trim
      6 slices bacon
                                                                                   away as much of the exter­
      1 large onion, peeled and diced large                                        nal fat as possible, though,
      1⁄ 2   cup cider vinegar                                                     or the dish will be too fatty.

      2 tablespoons kosher salt
                                                                                   OTHER NAMES
      2 tablespoons freshly cracked black pepper
      1⁄ 2
                                                                                   Pork shank, shoulder hock.
             teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes

                                                                                   OTHER CUTS YOU CAN USE
      2 fresh ham hocks, about 1 pound each, trimmed of most external fat
                                                                                   You can substitute smoked
      2 tablespoons vegetable oil
                                                                                   pork hocks, which are eas­
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                        ier to ﬁnd, for the fresh
      2 pounds new potatoes, washed and halved                                     hocks called for here. Or, if
                                                                                   you’re a bold cook, try
                                                                                   using smoked pig’s feet,
       1. In a large stockpot, bring 1 gallon of water to a boil. Add the col­     also known as trotters.
lards, bacon, and onion and stir several times, then reduce the heat to low
and add the vinegar, salt, pepper, and pepper ﬂakes. Cover and simmer for
2 hours. Remove the greens with tongs, drain them, and set them aside.
Skim the fat from the liquid (the “pot likker”) and leave it in the stockpot
over very low heat.
      2. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

      3. In a deep roasting pan, toss the ham hocks with the oil, then sprin­
kle generously with salt and pepper. Roast for 20 minutes to brown, then
reduce the oven temperature to 300°F. Remove the hocks from the pan
and skim off the fat that has accumulated in the pan, leaving the meat



                                                                  PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES                  403
                                  juices behind. Put the hocks back in the pan and add enough pot likker to
                                  cover them about halfway. Cover the pan tightly with foil and braise in the
                                  oven for 11⁄ 2 hours.
                                        4. Add the greens and potatoes to the pan, cover again, and cook
                                  until the hocks and potatoes are tender, another 30 minutes to 1 hour. To
                                  check for doneness, stick a fork straight down into the meat and try to pull
                                  the fork out. If the fork slides out easily, the meat is done; if the meat
                                  hangs on to the fork, give it more time.
                                        5. To serve, spoon the greens onto a serving platter and moisten
                                  them slightly with pot likker. Pull the meat from the hocks, set it on top of
                                  the greens, and surround with the potatoes.




THE CUT

Ham hocks are the lower
                                  Smoked Ham Hocks with
portion of the leg of the
pig, usually cut into pieces
                                  Indian-Spiced Green Split Peas
2 to 3 inches long. Hocks
are full of fat, gristle, and             S E RVE S 4

connective tissue, along
with some very ﬂavorful           In years past, many poor families raised a pig or two in their backyard. When
meat, and are typically
                                  that pig was butchered, not a single part of it was allowed to go to waste. The
smoked or cured, or both.
                                  feet and ears got pickled (taken together, they were known as “souse”), all
                                  the little trimmings got ground up and made into sausage, even the meat
                                  from the head was transformed into head cheese. Hocks, which are basically
                                  the ankle of the pig, were traditionally smoked and then cooked up with a
                                  mess o’ greens or used to add rich ﬂavor to large pots of hearty soups like
                                  split pea.
                                          Here we work a little change on that tradition by cooking the ham hocks
                                  separately, then serving them on top of a bowl of split peas ﬂavored with
                                  Indian spices. The best approach is to take a forkful of meat from the hock,
                                  load up some of the peas on top, and eat it.
                                          Like other cuts of meat that have plenty of fat and gristle, ham hocks
                                  require long cooking and taste even better if they are cooked a day ahead.
                                  This advance cooking also gives you a chance to skim off the top layer of fat
                                  that accumulates after the hocks (and the reserved cooking liquid we use
                                  here) cool down. However you choose to approach it, though, this is a great




404             H OW T O C O O K M E AT
dish for a cold winter’s day, particularly since it requires you to keep pots sim­
mering on the stove for hours.
      For an extra treat, top each ham hock with some Batter-Fried Onion
Rings (page 437), or serve the onion rings alongside.

      FOR THE HOCKS

      4 large meaty smoked ham hocks
      2 medium onions, peeled and quartered
      2 carrots, peeled and diced large
      2 stalks celery, diced large
      1 tablespoon minced garlic
      2 bay leaves
      2 allspice berries (or substitute 1 ⁄4 teaspoon ground allspice)
      10 black peppercorns
      Stems from 1 bunch parsley
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste

      FOR THE PEAS

      2 tablespoons olive oil
      1 yellow onion, peeled and diced small
      1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger
      1 tablespoon minced garlic
      1⁄ 2   teaspoon turmeric
      1⁄ 2   teaspoon ground cumin
      1⁄ 2   teaspoon ground coriander
      1 teaspoon freshly cracked black pepper, plus more to taste
      1 pound green split peas, picked through and washed
      Kosher salt to taste
      2 carrots, peeled and diced medium


      1. In a large stockpot, combine all the ingredients for the hocks,
cover with water, and bring to a simmer over high heat. Reduce the heat to
medium-low and cook, uncovered, until the hocks are falling-off-the-bone
tender, about 3 hours. To check for doneness, plunge a fork straight down
into the meat and try to pull the fork out. If the fork slips right out, the
meat is done; if the meat hangs on to the fork at all, give it more time.
      2. When the hocks are done, let them cool in the cooking liquid,
then transfer them to a saucepan, along with enough of the cooking liquid
to cover (about 2 cups). Strain the remaining cooking liquid into a bowl
and add enough water to make a total of 6 cups liquid. (Or refrigerate the
hocks and liquid until you are ready to cook the peas.)




                                                                         PORK: SWINE OF THE TIMES   405
                               3. Make the peas: In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-high
                        heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and cook, stirring occasion­
                        ally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the ginger, garlic, and spices and
                        cook, stirring, for 1 minute more. Add the 6 cups reserved diluted cooking
                        liquid and bring to a simmer, then add the split peas and salt. Simmer gen­
                        tly, uncovered, until the peas are just tender, about 30 minutes, adding
                        more water if necessary. Add the diced carrots and continue cooking until
                        the carrots are tender and the peas are falling apart, about 20 minutes
                        more.
                              4. During the last 10 minutes of cooking time for the peas, remove
                        the skins from the hocks, then reheat them in their cooking liquid over
                        low heat.
                              5. To serve, divide the split peas among four soup bowls and top each
                        with a ham hock. Ladle some of the cooking liquid over each one and
                        serve.




406   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                              FAVO R I T E               CLASSIC
                                                     Side D I S H E S




T    here are certain side dishes that over the years have proved their

mettle as crowd-pleasing accompaniments to meat. To make the meal

complete, we’ve assembled for you here the recipes for our Top 10 Classic Side Dishes in
each of the following categories: Potatoes, Rice and Beans (On Their Own and Together),
Green Vegetables, Non-Green Vegetables, and Hobo Packs. Tasty and trusty, each of them
will serve you well.




                                                                                           407
      TOP 10 SIMPLE CLASSIC
      POTATO DISHES

      Potatoes Anna

      Roesti Potatoes

      Au Gratin Potatoes (Gratin Dauphinois)

      French Fries

      Hash Browns

      Parsleyed New Potatoes

      Mashed Potatoes

      Potatoes Macaire

      Roasted Potatoes

      Baked Stuffed Potatoes




408
Potatoes Anna
      S E RVE S 6



The trick here is to slice the potatoes very thin and very evenly. A mandoline
or other slicing machine is a big help.

      12 tablespoons (11 ⁄ 2 sticks) unsalted butter, melted
      6 large baking potatoes, peeled and very thinly sliced
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Preheat the oven to 425°F.

      2. Put 6 tablespoons of the melted butter in a heavy medium sauté
pan (preferably cast iron). Arrange a layer of potato slices, overlapping
slightly, in concentric circles to cover the bottom of the pan. Top with a lit­
tle more melted butter and season with salt and pepper. Continue layering
the potatoes, butter, and seasonings in this fashion.
      3. Lightly butter a lid that will ﬁt snugly inside the pan, and place it
directly on top of the potatoes. Place the pan on a baking sheet and bake
for 20 minutes. Remove the lid and continue baking for 25 to 30 minutes
more, until the potatoes are golden brown on the top and sides.
     4. To serve, place a large serving plate over the potatoes and invert
the potatoes onto the plate, then cut the potatoes into wedges.




                                                               FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S   409
                        Roesti Potatoes
                                S E RVE S 6



                        This recipe differs from Potatoes Anna (page 409) only in that the potatoes
                        are shredded rather than very thinly sliced, which makes them less work and
                        easier to cook.

                                8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter, melted
                                6 large baking potatoes, peeled and shredded
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                1. Preheat the oven to 425°F.

                              2. In a heavy medium sauté pan (preferably cast iron), melt the but­
                        ter over medium heat. Add the potatoes, tossing until they are well coated
                        with the butter. Season with salt and pepper and gently press down on the
                        potatoes with a spatula to form a large ﬂat cake. Reduce the heat to low
                        and cook until the potatoes are tender and golden brown on the bottom,
                        30 to 40 minutes.
                              3. Place a large plate over the potatoes and invert the potatoes onto
                        the plate. Slide the potatoes, browned side up, back into the pan and con­
                        tinue cooking until the second side is well browned, 10 to 15 minutes
                        more.
                             4. Place a serving plate over the potatoes and invert the pan again.
                        Cut the potatoes into wedges and serve.




                        Au Gratin Potatoes
                        (Gratin Dauphinois)
                                S E RVE S 6 TO 8


                                1 clove garlic, peeled and halved
                                1 tablespoon unsalted butter, at room temperature
                                6 large baking potatoes, peeled and thinly sliced
                                3 cups half-and-half or milk or a mix of the two
                                Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg (optional)
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                1 cup grated Gruyère or other mild grating cheese




410   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
     1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.

     2. Rub the surface of a 2-quart baking dish with the garlic halves.
Coat the dish with the butter and set it aside.
       3. In a large saucepan, combine the potatoes, half-and-half, nutmeg,
and salt and pepper and bring to a simmer over medium heat. Cook gently,
stirring occasionally, until the liquid thickens slightly, about 5 minutes.
     4. Transfer the potato mixture to the baking dish and sprinkle the
grated cheese over the top. Bake until the cheese is melted and golden and
the potatoes are tender when pierced with a fork, about 45 minutes. Serve
the potatoes in the baking dish, hot from the oven.




French Fries                                                                                      FOR STRAW POTATOES

                                                                                                 Cut the potatoes into
                                                                                                 julienne strips less than
     S E RVE S 6                                                                                 1 ⁄ 8 inch thick.



These are the hands-down favorite of Chris’s nephew Tommy, a seventeen-                           FOR POTATO CHIPS
year-old vegetarian who knows a thing or two about French fries.                                 Cut the potatoes into slices
                                                                                                 less than 1 ⁄ 8 inch thick.
     2 quarts vegetable oil
     6 large baking potatoes, peeled, cut into 1 ⁄ 2-inch-thick strips, and soaked in
         cold water for 30 minutes
     Kosher salt to taste


      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot, heat the oil
to 325°F. Meanwhile, drain the potatoes and dry very well with paper tow­
els. When the oil comes up to temperature, carefully drop a handful of
potato strips at a time into the oil and cook them for about 2 minutes.
Transfer the potatoes to a paper towel–lined baking sheet to drain.
      2. After all of the potatoes have been allowed to cool, heat the oil to
375°F. Fry the potatoes again, in small batches, until they are crisp and
golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes. Drain again on paper towels, season to taste
with salt, and serve immediately.




                                                                  FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S            411
FOR POTATOES O’BRIEN

Add 1 ⁄4 cup each green and
                                Hash Browns
red bell peppers, diced
                                        S E RVE S 6
small, before you add the
potatoes to the sauté pan.
                                        4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter, at room temperature
                                        2 tablespoons olive oil
FOR HOME FRIES
                                        8 medium all-purpose potatoes, boiled, peeled, and diced small
After melting the butter,
add 1 small onion, peeled               Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
and diced small, and sauté              1 tablespoon unsalted butter, melted
until translucent, about 7
minutes. Add an additional
2 tablespoons olive oil               1. In a heavy medium sauté pan, melt 2 tablespoons of the butter
before you add the pota­        with 1 tablespoon of the olive oil over medium heat. Spread the potatoes
toes to the pan.                in an even layer in the pan, pressing down on them slightly with a spatula.
                                Season with salt and pepper and cook until the potatoes begin to brown
                                on the bottom, 6 to 7 minutes, shaking the pan occasionally to prevent
                                sticking. Pour the melted butter over the top of the potatoes.
                                      2. Place a large plate over the pan and invert the potatoes onto the
                                plate. Add the remaining 2 tablespoons butter and 1 tablespoon olive oil to
                                the pan, slide the potatoes back in, and brown on the other side, about 5
                                minutes more. Season with salt and pepper and slide onto a platter. Serve
                                immediately.




                                Parsleyed New Potatoes
                                        S E RVE S 6


                                        24 new potatoes, well washed
                                        5 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                        3 tablespoons ﬁnely chopped fresh parsley
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                      In a large saucepan, cover the potatoes with cold salted water. Bring
                                to a boil, reduce the heat to low, and simmer until the potatoes are tender,
                                13 to 15 minutes. Drain the potatoes and return to the pan, along with the
                                butter, parsley, and salt and pepper. Toss to combine well and serve imme­
                                diately.




412           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Mashed Potatoes                                                                                FOR ROASTED-GARLIC
                                                                                               MASHED POTATOES

                                                                                              Roast a head of garlic by
     S E RVE S 6
                                                                                              slicing off the top, placing it
                                                                                              on a length of aluminum
     6 large baking potatoes, peeled and quartered                                            foil, and drizzling it with
     6 tablespoons (3 ⁄4 stick) unsalted butter, at room temperature, plus more               olive oil. Close up the foil
        for serving                                                                           around the garlic and roast
     3 ⁄4   to 1 cup milk or cream, warmed                                                    it in a preheated 400°F
     2 tablespoons sour cream, at room temperature                                            oven for 50 to 60 minutes.
                                                                                              When the garlic is soft and
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                                    golden brown, pop the
                                                                                              cloves out of their skins.
     1. In a large saucepan, just cover the potatoes with cold salted water.                  Add them to the potatoes
                                                                                              before mashing.
Cover the pan, bring to a boil, and boil until the potatoes are tender, about
20 minutes. Drain the potatoes and return to the hot pan. Place over
                                                                                               FOR HORSERADISH
medium heat brieﬂy, shaking the pan, to dry the potatoes.                                      MASHED POTATOES

                                                                                              Add 1 ⁄ 2 to 3 ⁄4 cup freshly
     2. Remove the pan from the heat and add the butter, 3 ⁄4 cup milk, and
                                                                                              grated horseradish
the sour cream. Season well with salt and pepper. Mash the potatoes until                     (depending on its strength
they are smooth, adding more milk if the potatoes seem dry. Give the                          and your taste) or 3 table­
potatoes a ﬁnal, vigorous stir with a whisk to ﬂuff them, and transfer to a                   spoons prepared horserad­
                                                                                              ish to the potatoes before
serving bowl. Top with more butter and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
                                                                                              mashing.
Serve immediately.
                                                                                               FOR BLUE CHEESE
                                                                                               MASHED POTATOES

                                                                                              Add the full cup of milk or
                                                                                              cream and omit the sour
                                                                                              cream. Add 1 ⁄ 2 cup crum­
                                                                                              bled blue cheese before
                                                                                              mashing.




                                                               FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S          413
                                Potatoes Macaire
                                        S E RVE S 6



                                This is also a great way to use leftover mashed potatoes.

                                        6 large baking potatoes, peeled and quartered
                                        3 scallions (white and green parts), minced
                                        6 tablespoons unsalted butter (3 ⁄4 stick), at room temperature
                                        1⁄ 2   cup milk or cream, warmed
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                        2 tablespoons vegetable oil


                                      1. In a large saucepan, barely cover the potatoes with cold salted
                                water. Bring to a boil and cook until the potatoes are tender, about 20 min­
                                utes. Drain the potatoes and return to the hot pan. Place over medium
                                heat brieﬂy, shaking the pan, to dry the potatoes.
                                     2. Remove the pan from the heat, add the scallions, 4 tablespoons of
                                the butter, the milk, and salt and pepper, and mash the potatoes until
                                smooth. Form the potatoes into 6 cakes.
                                      3. In a large sauté pan, melt the remaining 2 tablespoons of butter
                                with the oil over medium heat. Add the potato cakes, in batches if neces­
                                sary to avoid crowding, and fry until golden brown on both sides, 3 to 4
                                minutes per side. Serve immediately.




ROASTED POTATOES
WITH BLACK OLIVES               Roasted Potatoes
Add 1 ⁄ 2 cup pitted and
roughly chopped briny                   S E RVE S 6

black olives to the potatoes
before cooking.                         6 medium Red Bliss or baking potatoes, peeled and cut lengthwise into
                                           sixths
                                        1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                        7 to 8 sprigs fresh thyme or rosemary
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                        1. Preheat the oven to 450°F.

                                      2. In a large bowl, toss the potatoes with the olive oil, thyme sprigs,
                                and salt and pepper. Place the potatoes on a baking sheet and roast, turn­
                                ing after about 20 minutes, until they are golden brown and tender, 30 to
                                40 minutes. Serve immediately.


414           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Baked Stuffed Potatoes                                                                          FOR BACON-CHEESE
                                                                                                STUFFED POTATOES

                                                                                               When you mix the potato
     S E RVE S 6
                                                                                               innards with the sour
                                                                                               cream and other ingredi­
     3 large baking potatoes                                                                   ents, add 8 strips of bacon,
     Vegetable oil                                                                             cooked until crisp and bro­
     1⁄ 2   cup sour cream                                                                     ken into bits, and 3 ⁄4 cup
     1⁄ 2
                                                                                               shredded Cheddar cheese.
            cup milk, warmed
                                                                                               Sprinkle the ﬁnished pota­
     6 tablespoons minced fresh chives                                                         toes with 2 tablespoons
     4 tablespoons unsalted butter (1 ⁄ 2 stick), at room temperature                          freshly grated Parmesan
                                                                                               cheese.
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


     1. Preheat the oven to 400°F.

      2. Wash the potatoes and dry them well. Rub them with oil and bake
until soft, about 1 hour. Let cool slightly. (Leave the oven on.)
      3. As soon as the baked potatoes are cool enough to handle, cut them
lengthwise in half and hollow them out, leaving no more than a 1⁄4-inch
thickness of potato in each shell. Place the potato innards in a medium
bowl. Place the shells on a baking sheet, return to the oven, and bake until
they are crisp, 10 to 15 minutes. Remove from the oven.
     4. While the shells are baking, add the sour cream, milk, 4 table­
spoons of the chives, 3 tablespoons of the butter, and salt and pepper to
the potatoes and mash until smooth.
      5. Turn the oven to broil. Fill the crisped shells with the potato mix­
ture, dot with the remaining 1 tablespoon butter, and sprinkle with the
remaining 2 tablespoons chives. Return the stuffed potatoes to the baking
sheet and broil until the potatoes are piping hot and the tops are golden
brown, 7 to 9 minutes. Serve at once.




                                                                FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S        415
      TOP 10 SIMPLE CLASSIC
      RICE AND BEAN DISHES
      (on their own and together)

      Simple Rice Pilaf

      Persian Rice

      Coconut Rice

      Spanish Rice

      Basic Fried Rice

      Hoppin’ John

      Latin-Style Black Beans and Rice

      Spicy Latin Black Beans

      Mediterranean White Bean Salad

      Simple Lentils




416
Simple Rice Pilaf                                                                                FOR RICE PILAF WITH
                                                                                                 ALMONDS AND CURRANTS

                                                                                                With the parsley, add
     S E RVE S 4                                                                                1 ⁄4 cup almonds, toasted in

                                                                                                a dry skillet over medium
     2 tablespoons unsalted butter                                                              heat, shaking frequently,
     1 medium onion, peeled and diced large                                                     until fragrant, 3 to 5 min­
     11 ⁄ 2 cups long-grain white rice                                                          utes, and 1 ⁄4 cup currants.

     21 ⁄ 2 cups chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste                                       FOR RICE PILAF WITH LIME
     1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh parsley                                                    ZEST, PINE NUTS, AND
                                                                                                 AROMATIC SPICES

                                                                                                With the onion, add 2 table­
     1. In a medium saucepan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the
                                                                                                spoons pine nuts. With the
onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.                       stock, add 1 ⁄ 2 teaspoon red
Add the rice and cook, stirring to coat completely with the butter, for 1                       pepper ﬂakes, 1 ⁄ 2 teaspoon
minute.                                                                                         each ground cardamom
                                                                                                and cinnamon, and 2 tea­
      2. Add the stock and salt and pepper and bring to a simmer, then                          spoons ﬁnely minced lime
reduce the heat to low, cover, and cook gently until the rice is tender and                     zest (green part only). With
                                                                                                the parsley, add 1 ⁄ 3 cup
the liquid is absorbed, checking for doneness after 15 minutes. Remove                          golden raisins.
from the heat, remove the lid, and cover the pan with a towel. Cover the
towel with the lid and allow to stand for 5 minutes.
     3. Stir in the parsley and serve.




                                                                 FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S         417
                        Persian Rice
                                S E RVE S 4


                                2 cups long-grain white rice
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                10 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                1 small onion, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced


                              1. Bring a large pot (about 4 quarts) of salted water to a boil. Add the
                        rice and cook, uncovered, for 10 minutes. Drain, season with salt and pep­
                        per, and set aside.
                              2. In a large nonstick skillet, melt 6 tablespoons of the butter over
                        medium-high heat. Add the onion and cook, stirring frequently, until
                        translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the rice and press down on it with a spoon
                        or spatula to form a smooth, even surface. Cover tightly, reduce the heat to
                        low, and cook, undisturbed, for 50 minutes.
                              3. About 10 minutes before the rice is done, melt the remaining 4
                        tablespoons butter. Uncover the rice, drizzle the butter over it, cover, and
                        cook for the remaining 10 minutes.
                               4. To serve, uncover the rice, place a large platter over the top of the
                        skillet, and invert the rice onto it. The bottom layer of rice should be beau­
                        tifully browned and crunchy.




                        Coconut Rice
                                S E RVE S 4


                                2 tablespoons vegetable oil
                                1 small onion, peeled and diced small
                                1 cup long-grain white rice
                                1 cup chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32) or water
                                1 cup unsweetened coconut milk
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                              1. In a large sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-high heat until hot
                        but not smoking. Add the onion and cook, stirring frequently, until
                        translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the rice and continue to cook, stirring fre­
                        quently, for 1 minute.



418   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
      2. Add the chicken stock and coconut milk, bring to a simmer, and
add the salt and pepper. Reduce the heat to low, cover, and cook gently
until the rice is tender and the liquid is absorbed, 15 to 18 minutes.
Remove from the heat, remove the lid, and cover the pan with a towel.
Cover the towel with the lid and allow to stand for at least 5 minutes. Serve
hot or at room temperature.




Spanish Rice
     S E RVE S 4 TO 6


     3 tablespoons olive oil
     1 small onion, peeled and diced small
     1 small green bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced small
     1 tablespoon minced garlic
     1 cup long-grain white rice
     13 ⁄4 cups chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
     1 cup chopped drained canned tomatoes
     1 tablespoon chile powder
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


     1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.

      2. In a large ovenproof sauté pan, heat the oil over medium-high heat
until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and green pepper and cook, stir­
ring frequently, until the onion is translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the gar­
lic and cook, stirring, for 1 minute. Add the rice and stir to coat it
thoroughly with the oil. Add the stock, tomatoes, chile powder, and salt
and pepper and bring to a boil.
      3. Stir the rice mixture once, cover, and transfer the pan to the oven.
Cook until the rice is tender, about 25 minutes. Uncover the pan and allow
the rice to stand for about 5 minutes, then ﬂuff the rice with a fork and
serve immediately.




                                                                FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S   419
                        Basic Fried Rice
                                S E RVE S 4


                                1 ⁄4   cup vegetable oil
                                2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger
                                1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                1 cup (uncooked) long-grain white rice
                                13 ⁄4 cups water
                                2 tablespoons sesame oil
                                1⁄ 2   red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced large
                                1⁄ 2   green bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced large
                                1 bunch scallions (white and green parts), thinly sliced
                                3 tablespoons soy sauce
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                              1. In a medium saucepan, heat 2 tablespoons of the vegetable oil
                        over medium heat until hot but not smoking. Add the ginger and garlic
                        and cook, stirring occasionally, for 2 minutes. Add the rice and cook, stir­
                        ring occasionally, for 2 more minutes. Add the water, cover, reduce the
                        heat to low, and cook until the water is absorbed and the rice is tender, 15
                        to 18 minutes. Remove from the heat, remove the lid, and cover the pan
                        with a towel. Cover with the lid and set aside for a few minutes.
                               2. In a large sauté pan, heat the sesame oil and the remaining 2 table­
                        spoons vegetable oil over medium heat until hot but not smoking. Add the
                        peppers and cook, stirring occasionally, for 2 minutes. Add the cooked rice
                        and cook for a few minutes to heat through, stirring occasionally. Add the
                        scallions and soy sauce and stir until the soy is thoroughly mixed in. Sea­
                        son with salt and pepper and serve.




420   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Hoppin’ John
     S E RVE S 4 TO 6


     1 cup dried black-eyed peas, picked through and rinsed
     1 smoked ham hock, 8 to 12 ounces
     1 large onion, peeled and diced small
     1 teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes
     3 sprigs fresh thyme
     2 bay leaves
     11 ⁄ 2 cups long-grain white rice
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot with a lid,
combine the peas, ham hock, onion, pepper ﬂakes, thyme, and bay leaves
over medium-high heat and add enough water to cover by 2 inches. Bring
to a simmer, cover loosely, and cook until the peas are tender, 1 to 11⁄ 2
hours.
      2. Remove the ham hock from the pot and set aside. Bring the cook­
ing liquid to a full boil and reduce to about 3 cups. Remove the thyme
sprigs and bay leaves.
       3. When the ham hock is cool enough to handle, remove the meat,
cut it into small chunks, and return them to the pot. Add the rice, stirring
well to combine, season with salt and pepper, cover, and simmer until the
rice is tender and all the liquid is absorbed, 15 to 20 minutes. Allow to
stand, covered, for 5 to 10 minutes, then serve hot.




                                                              FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S   421
                        Latin-Style Black Beans and Rice
                                S E RVE S 4


                                1 tablespoon olive oil
                                1 small yellow onion, peeled and diced small
                                1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                1⁄ 2   red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and cut into long thin strips
                                1 teaspoon ground cumin
                                1 cup long-grain white rice
                                12 ⁄ 3 cups water or chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                1 teaspoon kosher salt, plus more to taste
                                2 cups cooked black beans or one 16-ounce can black beans
                                1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
                                Freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                              1. In a medium saucepan, heat the oil over medium-high heat until
                        hot but not smoking. Add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally, until
                        translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic, bell pepper, and cumin and
                        cook, stirring occasionally, for 2 minutes. Add the rice and cook, stirring,
                        for 1 minute. Add the water and salt and bring just to a simmer, then
                        reduce the heat to medium-low, cover, and cook until the water is
                        absorbed and the rice is tender, about 15 minutes.
                              2. When the rice is cooked, add the beans, mix well, and cook for
                        about 5 minutes, stirring occasionally, to heat the beans through. Add the
                        cilantro, season with salt and pepper, and serve.




422   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Spicy Latin Black Beans
     S E RVE S 4


     1 pound dried black beans, picked through and rinsed
     1 tablespoon minced canned chipotle peppers in adobo
     11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons cumin seeds
     1 small yellow onion, peeled and diced small
     1 tablespoon minced garlic
     2 teaspoons kosher salt, plus more to taste
     Freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     1 cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
     3 tablespoons sliced scallions (white and green parts)
     1⁄ 3   cup shredded Cheddar or Monterey Jack cheese (optional)


      1. In a medium saucepan, combine the beans, chipotles, cumin,
onion, and garlic over medium-high heat and add enough water to cover
by 2 inches. Bring to a simmer, partly cover, and cook until the beans are
tender, about 2 to 21⁄ 2 hours, adding more water as necessary. After the
beans have cooked for 30 minutes, add the salt.
      2. When the beans are tender, season with salt and pepper, top with
the cilantro, scallions, and cheese, if desired, and serve hot.




                                                              FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S   423
                        Mediterranean White Bean Salad
                                S E RVE S 6


                                1 pound dried cannellini, Great Northern, navy, or other white beans, picked
                                   through and rinsed
                                1 tablespoon kosher salt


                                FOR THE VINAIGRETTE
                                1⁄ 2   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                3 tablespoons red wine or sherry vinegar
                                1 tablespoon ﬁnely minced garlic
                                11 ⁄ 2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh thyme or oregano
                                      (or 2 teaspoons dried)
                                1 teaspoon Dijon mustard
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                2 ripe tomatoes, cored and diced medium
                                2 scallions (white and green parts), thinly sliced


                              1. Put the beans in a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot
                        with a lid and add water to cover by 2 inches. Place over medium-high heat
                        and bring to a simmer, reduce the heat to low, partly cover, and cook the
                        beans until tender, 1 to 11⁄ 2 hours; add the salt after the beans have cooked
                        for 30 minutes. When the beans are tender, drain, put into a large bowl,
                        and set aside to cool slightly.
                             2. While the beans are cooking, make the vinaigrette: In a small
                        bowl, whisk together the olive oil, vinegar, garlic, herbs, and mustard, sea­
                        son with salt and pepper, and set aside.
                              3. When the beans have cooled slightly, add the tomatoes and scal­
                        lions to the bowl. Add the vinaigrette and toss well to combine. Check the
                        seasoning and add more salt and pepper if necessary. Allow the salad to
                        cool to room temperature before serving, or refrigerate until ready to
                        serve.




424   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Simple Lentils
     S E RVE S 4


     8 ounces (about 1 cup) green, brown, or du Puy lentils, picked through and
        rinsed
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     1 small red onion, peeled and diced small
     2 medium tomatoes, cored and diced small
     1 small carrot, peeled and diced small
     1 cup roughly chopped fresh parsley
     1⁄ 3   cup olive oil
     1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
     1 ⁄4   cup pine nuts, toasted in a 350°F oven until lightly browned, about 10
            minutes (optional)


     1. In a medium saucepan, combine the lentils, 3 cups water, and salt
and pepper. Bring to a rapid boil over high heat, reduce the heat to
medium, and simmer until the lentils are tender to the bite but not mushy,
about 30 minutes. Drain and set aside to cool to room temperature.
      2. Meanwhile, in a medium bowl, combine the onion, tomatoes, car­
rot, and parsley.
     3. Add the cooled lentils to the vegetables and mix well.

       4. In a small bowl, whisk together the oil and lemon juice. Add to the
lentil mixture, toss well, and stir in the pine nuts, if using them. Serve
warm, at room temperature, or chilled.




                                                                   FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S   425
      TOP 10 SIMPLE CLASSIC
      GREEN VEGETABLE DISHES

      Roasted Asparagus

      Quick-Sautéed Spinach with Garlic

      Brussels Sprouts in Brown Butter

      Minted Fresh Peas

      Green Beans with Mushrooms and Almonds

      Crispy Fried Okra

      Braised Leeks

      Sautéed Broccoli with Garlic and Oil

      Creamed Spinach

      Lima Beans with Bacon and Thyme




426
Roasted Asparagus
      S E RVE S 4 TO 6


      25 to 30 spears asparagus, bottom 1 ⁄4 inch trimmed and washed
      1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Preheat the oven to 500°F.

      2. Place the asparagus in a roasting pan just large enough to hold the
spears in a single layer. Drizzle with the olive oil and toss to coat well, then
season liberally with salt and pepper. Roast until the asparagus is just ten­
der, 8 to 10 minutes. Serve warm or at room temperature.




Quick-Sautéed Spinach
with Garlic
      S E RVE S 4


      1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
      11 ⁄4 pounds spinach, trimmed, well washed, and dried
      3 cloves garlic, peeled and very thinly sliced
      1 lemon, halved
      Generous pinch of red pepper ﬂakes
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. In your largest sauté pan, heat the oil over high heat until very hot,
almost smoking. Add the spinach and cook, stirring furiously, for about 1
minute; the spinach should turn bright green and wilt slightly. Add the gar­
lic and continue to cook, stirring rapidly, for 30 seconds.
      2. Remove the spinach from the heat, squeeze the lemon over the
top, and add the red pepper and salt and black pepper. Toss well and serve.




                                                              FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S   427
                        Brussels Sprouts in Brown Butter
                                S E RVE S 4


                                1 pound Brussels sprouts, well washed and stems trimmed
                                3 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                              1. Bring a large pot of salted water to the boil. Fill a large bowl with
                        ice and water. Cook the sprouts in the boiling water until just tender,
                        about 4 minutes. When the sprouts are done, drain and plunge them into
                        the ice water; wait a few minutes, then drain them well and halve or quar­
                        ter them.
                              2. In a large sauté pan, heat the butter over medium heat until foamy.
                        Add the sprouts, season lightly with salt and pepper, and toss to coat them
                        with the butter. Keep tossing until the butter begins to brown lightly and
                        the sprouts are heated through. Serve immediately.




                        Minted Fresh Peas
                                S E RVE S 4


                                2 cups fresh peas
                                1 tablespoon unsalted butter
                                1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh mint
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                              1. Bring a medium pot of salted water to the boil. Fill a large bowl
                        with ice and water. Blanch the peas in the boiling water for 30 seconds,
                        drain, plunge into the ice water to stop the cooking process, and drain
                        again.
                             2. In a medium sauté pan, melt the butter over medium heat and add
                        the peas. Sauté them for about 2 minutes, stirring occasionally, then stir in
                        the mint, season with salt and pepper, and serve immediately.




428   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Green Beans with Mushrooms
and Almonds
     S E RVE S 4


     1 pound green beans, trimmed
     2 tablespoons unsalted butter
     2 tablespoons olive oil
     2⁄ 3   cup thinly sliced white mushrooms
     2⁄ 3   cup slivered blanched almonds, toasted in a sauté pan over medium
            heat, shaken frequently, until fragrant, 3 to 5 minutes
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


     1. In a large saucepan, bring 1 inch of salted water to a boil over
medium-high heat. Add the beans, cover, and steam until just tender,
about 10 minutes. Drain well, rinse with cold water to stop the cooking,
and drain again.
      2. While the beans are steaming, in a large sauté pan, melt the butter
with the oil over medium-high heat. Add the mushrooms, toss to coat
well, and cook, stirring occasionally, until tender and slightly browned, 5
to 7 minutes. Add the almonds and green beans to the pan, season with
salt and pepper, toss well, and serve.


Crispy Fried Okra
     S E RVE S 4


     1 pound small okra pods (2 inches or less in length)
     Vegetable oil for deep-frying
     About 2 ⁄ 3 cup coarsely ground cornmeal
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      1. Bring a medium pot of salted water to the boil. Fill a large bowl
with ice and water. Blanch the okra in the boiling water for 2 minutes,
drain, plunge into the ice water to stop the cooking process, and drain
again.
       2. In a large deep saucepan, heat 1 inch of oil until hot but not smok­
ing. Dry the okra well on paper towels and dredge in the cornmeal, shak­
ing off the excess. In batches, add only enough okra to the hot oil to form
a single layer and cook until golden, about 3 minutes. Drain on paper tow­
els, season generously with salt and pepper, and serve immediately.


                                                               FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S   429
                                Braised Leeks
                                        S E RVE S 4 TO 6



                                These leeks can also be served chilled or at room temperature, tossed with a
                                simple vinaigrette.

                                        4 cups chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                        6 medium leeks (white and tender green parts only root end trimmed but
                                           intact), halved lengthwise and thoroughly washed
                                        3 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh herbs: any one or a combination of
                                           parsley, oregano, chervil, thyme, and/or chives
                                        Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                      1. In a saucepan large enough to hold all the leeks in a single layer,
                                bring the stock to a simmer over medium-high heat. Add the leeks, cover
                                the pan, and simmer until the leeks are fork-tender, 15 to 20 minutes.
                                      2. Transfer the leeks to a serving platter, sprinkle with the herbs and
                                salt and pepper, and serve.



FOR BROCCOLI RABE
WITH GARLIC AND OIL             Sautéed Broccoli with Garlic
Substitute 1 large bunch
broccoli rabe, washed,          and Oil
trimmed, and cut into
                                        S E RVE S 4
1-inch pieces, for the
broccoli.                               1 large bunch broccoli, washed, trimmed, and separated into ﬂorets
                                        2 tablespoons olive oil
                                        1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                        1 ⁄4   teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes
                                        Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste


                                      1. In a large pot of boiling, generously salted water, cook the broccoli
                                until it is just tender, 2 to 3 minutes. Drain the broccoli, run under cold
                                water to stop the cooking, and drain again.
                                      2. In a medium sauté pan, heat the olive oil over medium-high heat
                                until it is hot but not smoking. Add the garlic and red pepper ﬂakes and
                                cook, stirring, for about 15 seconds, until the garlic begins to color. Add the
                                broccoli and sauté, tossing to coat with the oil, until it is heated through,
                                about 1 minute. Season with salt and pepper and serve immediately.



430           H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Creamed Spinach
     S E RVE S 4


     2 pounds spinach, trimmed and washed well
     1⁄ 2   cup heavy cream
     1 tablespoon unsalted butter
     Pinch of grated nutmeg
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked white pepper to taste


      1. In a large sauté pan, toss the spinach over high heat until wilted
(the water clinging to the leaves should be enough liquid to cook it in), 3 to
4 minutes.
     2. Gently squeeze the spinach to remove the excess liquid, then roughly
chop and return it to the pan. Add the cream, butter, nutmeg, and salt and
white pepper and bring just to a boil. Reduce the heat and simmer until the
cream has thickened, about 3 minutes. Adjust the seasonings and serve hot.


Lima Beans with Bacon and Thyme
     S E RVE S 4 TO 6


     3 slices thick-cut bacon, roughly chopped
     1 small yellow onion, peeled and diced small
     1 tablespoon minced garlic
     1 pound lima beans, thawed if frozen
     1⁄ 2   cup chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh thyme


     1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large heavy pot, cook the
bacon over medium-low heat until it is brown and crisp, 8 to 10 minutes.
Transfer the bacon to paper towels or a brown paper bag to drain.
      2. Pour off all but about 2 tablespoons of fat from the pot and return
it to medium-high heat. Add the onion and cook, stirring occasionally,
until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the garlic and cook, stirring, for 1
minute more. Add the beans, stock, and salt and pepper and bring to a sim­
mer, then reduce the heat to low and cook until the beans are just tender,
about 10 minutes (5 minutes if you are using frozen beans).
     3. Stir in the thyme and reserved bacon, then increase the heat to
reduce any liquid left in the pot. Serve immediately.


                                                                FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S   431
      TOP 10 SIMPLE CLASSIC
      (NON-GREEN) VEGETABLE DISHES

      Creamed Corn

      Grilled Corn on the Cob

      German-Style Braised Red Cabbage

      Mashed Turnips

      Roasted Winter Squash

      Roasted Carrots

      Candied Sweet Potatoes

      Batter-Fried Onion Rings

      Braised Fennel

      Hominy with Cheddar, Chiles, and Sour Cream




432
Creamed Corn
      S E RVE S 4


      2 tablespoons unsalted butter
      1⁄ 2   red onion, peeled and diced small
      1⁄ 2   red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and diced small
      4 ears corn, husked and kernels cut off the cob (or substitute 21 ⁄ 2 cups
         thawed frozen corn)
      2⁄ 3   cup heavy cream
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


      In a medium sauté pan, melt the butter over medium heat. Add the
onion and bell pepper and cook, stirring frequently, until the onion is
translucent, 7 to 9 minutes. Add the corn, cream, and salt and pepper and
cook, stirring once, until slightly thickened, for 3 to 4 minutes. Serve
immediately.




Grilled Corn on the Cob
      S E RVE S 4 TO 6


      12 ears corn, husked
      Unsalted butter for serving
      Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
      4 limes, cut into wedges (optional)


      1. Build a ﬁre in your grill.

      2. Fill your sink or a large pot with ice and water. In a large pot, bring
2 quarts of lightly salted water to a rolling boil over high heat. Add the
corn and blanch for 1 minute. Drain and plunge into the ice-water bath to
stop the cooking process; drain again.
      3. When the ﬁre has died down and the coals are medium-hot (you
can hold your hand 5 inches above the grill surface for 3 to 4 seconds), put
the corn on the grill and cook for 3 to 4 minutes, rolling often, until golden
brown. Remove the corn from the grill, spread with butter, sprinkle liber­
ally with salt and pepper, and drizzle each ear with a squeeze of lime, if
desired. Serve immediately.




                                                                 FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S   433
                        German-Style Braised Red Cabbage
                                S E RVE S 6


                                4 slices bacon, roughly chopped
                                1⁄ 2   teaspoon caraway seeds
                                1 small onion, peeled and diced small
                                1 medium head red cabbage, cored and shredded
                                2 apples, peeled, cored, and diced medium
                                2 tablespoons molasses
                                1 ⁄4   cup red wine vinegar
                                1 ⁄4   cup dry white wine
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                              1. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other heavy pot with a lid, cook
                        the bacon over medium-low heat until the fat is rendered. Add the caraway
                        seeds, increase the heat to medium, and cook, stirring, until the seeds are
                        fragrant, about 2 minutes. Add the onion and cook, stirring frequently,
                        until translucent, 7 to 9 minutes.
                               2. Add the cabbage, apples, molasses, vinegar, wine, and salt and pep­
                        per and stir to combine the ingredients well. Bring to a simmer, cover, and
                        cook until the cabbage is very tender, about 11⁄ 2 hours. Adjust the season­
                        ing if necessary and serve immediately.

                        Mashed Turnips
                                S E RVE S 4 TO 6


                                11 ⁄ 2 pounds Macumber or other turnips, peeled and cut into even-sized
                                      chunks about 11 ⁄ 2 inches square
                                1 ⁄4   cup plain yogurt
                                1 ⁄4   cup fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
                                1 tablespoon minced garlic
                                1 ⁄4   cup chopped fresh parsley
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                              1. In a large pot of boiling salted water, cook the turnips just until
                        easily pierced with a fork, 6 to 8 minutes; do not overcook. Drain well.
                              2. Place the turnips in a large bowl and add the remaining ingredi­
                        ents. Mash roughly with a potato masher, adjust the seasoning, and serve
                        at once.




434   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Roasted Winter Squash
     S E RVE S 4


     One 2- to 3-pound butternut or acorn squash, or 2 smaller squash, halved
       lengthwise and strings and seeds removed
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
     2 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted, plus extra if desired
     2 tablespoons dark brown sugar


     1. Preheat the oven to 400°F.

     2. Place the squash halves cut side up on a baking sheet, sprinkle
with salt and pepper, and brush with the melted butter. Crumble the
brown sugar over the squash and bake until tender, about 1 hour, basting
occasionally with more melted butter if desired. Serve hot.




Roasted Carrots                                                                                FOR ROASTED BEETS

                                                                                              Substitute beets for the
                                                                                              carrots and thyme or
     S E RVE S 4                                                                              oregano for the rosemary;
                                                                                              trim and halve the beets
     2 pounds carrots, peeled and cut into 2-inch lengths (fatter pieces halved               before roasting.
        lengthwise)
     1 medium red onion, peeled and cut into 1-inch wedges
     2 tablespoons olive oil
     2 tablespoons fresh rosemary needles
     Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


     1. Preheat the oven to 425°F.

      2. In a roasting pan large enough to hold the vegetables comfortably,
toss the carrots and onion with the oil, rosemary, and salt and pepper so
that they are well coated. Spread them out evenly in the pan and roast,
turning after about 20 minutes, until cooked through, about 50 minutes.
Serve hot.




                                                               FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S      435
                        Candied Sweet Potatoes
                                S E RVE S 4


                                3 pounds sweet potatoes (about 4 large), washed
                                3 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste
                                1⁄ 3   cup coarse-cut orange marmalade
                                3 tablespoons brown sugar
                                Pinch of ground cardamom
                                2 tablespoons rum (optional)


                                1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.

                              2. Place the sweet potatoes on a small baking sheet and bake until
                        they are still ﬁrm but not hard in the center, about 45 minutes. Let cool
                        slightly. (Leave the oven on.)
                             3. As soon as the sweet potatoes are cool enough to handle, peel them
                        and cut them crosswise into quarters. Butter a casserole dish just large
                        enough to hold the potatoes in a single layer, using 1 tablespoon of the
                        butter. Arrange the potatoes in the dish and sprinkle with salt and pepper.
                              4. In a small saucepan, combine the marmalade, brown sugar, car­
                        damom, rum, if using, and the remaining 2 tablespoons butter and cook
                        over medium heat, stirring occasionally, until the mixture is melted and
                        smooth. Pour over the sweet potatoes and bake until they are well glazed,
                        about 20 minutes, basting occasionally with the liquid in the dish. If
                        desired, baste again and broil for 20 to 30 seconds before serving.




436   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
Batter-Fried Onion Rings
     S E RVE S 4


     1 cup all-purpose ﬂour
     11 ⁄ 2 teaspoons kosher salt
     One 12-ounce bottle beer
     10 dashes Tabasco sauce
     2 yellow onions, peeled, sliced 1 ⁄4 inch thick, and separated into rings
     Vegetable oil


     1. Preheat the oven to 225°F.

       2. Make the beer batter: In a large bowl, combine the ﬂour and salt.
Add the beer all at once, along with the Tabasco, and mix well until the
batter is combined and slightly frothy. Set the batter aside to rest for at
least 1⁄ 2 hour, or up to 2 hours. Drop the onions into a bowl of ice water to
soak while the batter is resting.
       3. In a 5-inch-deep Dutch oven or other large, heavy pot, heat 2
inches of vegetable oil to 375°. Remove the onion slices from the ice water
and dry them thoroughly with paper towels. Dip them in the batter a few
at a time, drop gently into the oil, and fry until they are crisp and golden
brown. As they are done, transfer to a paper towel–lined baking sheet,
sprinkle with kosher salt, and put in the oven to keep warm while you ﬁn­
ish frying the rest.




                                                                 FAV O R I T E C L A S S I C S I D E D I S H E S   437
                        Braised Fennel
                                S E RVE S 4 TO 6


                                3 tablespoons unsalted butter
                                2 tablespoons olive oil
                                2 medium fennel bulbs, stalks trimmed, cored, and cut lengthwise into
                                   sixths
                                1 cup chicken stock (or see Stock Options, page 32)
                                3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 1 lemon)
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                              1. In a large sauté pan, melt the butter with the olive oil over
                        medium-high heat. Add the fennel and sauté until golden brown on all
                        sides, 9 to 11 minutes.
                             2. Add the chicken stock, lemon juice, and salt and pepper, bring to a
                        simmer, cover, and cook until the fennel is just tender, about 20 minutes.
                        Uncover and allow the liquid in the pan to reduce and become syrupy, 3 to 5
                        minutes more. Serve immediately, with the pan juices poured over the top.




                        Hominy with Cheddar, Chiles, and
                        Sour Cream
                                S E RVE S 4


                                Two 30-ounce cans hominy, drained and rinsed
                                2⁄ 3   cup sour cream
                                1 to 2 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice, or less to
                                   taste
                                6 ounces Cheddar cheese, grated
                                Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


                                1. Preheat the oven to 350°F.

                              2. Spread one third of the hominy in the bottom of a small baking
                        dish. Spread half the sour cream, half the chiles, and half the cheese on
                        top. Season with salt and pepper. Repeat to form a second layer, and top
                        with the remaining hominy. Bake uncovered until the top is golden, about
                        30 minutes. Serve hot.




438   H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                                                      HOBO                PAC K S




H      obo packs are basically a throwback to my (Chris’s) Boy Scout days. The regu­
lation version—which consists of carrots, onions, hamburger, and a lot of catsup all
wrapped up in foil and stuck in the ashes to cook—was the ﬁrst thing I ever cooked for my
peers. It was a big success, so the memory of it has stuck with me over the years. As I have
cooked for different audiences, I’ve expanded on and modiﬁed the technique, but the basics
remain the same.
        I’m fond of hobo packs for several reasons. First, the process is incredibly easy. Sec­
ond, this is a very adaptable cooking method, equally suitable for the backyard grill, the ﬁre­
place in your living room, or a driftwood ﬁre on the beach. And, third, it is a very exciting
cooking method. Every time you set a hobo pack in the ashes, it’s the beginning of a true
culinary adventure. The possible incineration of dinner provides built-in drama, and the
smoky, ash-seared ﬂavor of the food that emerges from the foil is the payoff.
        Hobo packs are particularly good accompaniments to grilled meats. Not only do
they taste great, but, since you’ve got the ﬁre lit anyway, it’s very little extra work to wrap
up some vegetables, stick them in the coals, and cook your side dish at the same time.
        The two keys to an exceptional hobo pack are to wrap the food very well in the foil
and to place the package in the coals in the cooler part of the ﬁre, then pile the coals up
around (but not on top of ) it. For each of the hobo pack combinations here, follow the gen­
eral directions below.
To Prepare: Combine all the ingredients in a large bowl and toss gently to combine. Tear off
four sheets of heavy-duty foil, each about 2 feet long, and stack them one on top of the
other. Arrange the combined ingredients in the center of the top sheet and season with salt
and pepper. Fold up the sheets of foil around the vegetables, one after the other, turning the
package one quarter turn between each sheet and making sure that each sheet is well sealed
around the vegetables.



                                                                                                  439
      To Cook: Place the hobo packs in the coals around the periphery of the
      ﬁre, where the heat is less intense. Pile the coals up around the packs and
      cook until the vegetables are tender, as indicated in the individual recipe.
      Remove from the coals, unroll the foil, and serve hot.




      TOP TEN HOBO PACK SIDE DISHES

      Potato and Eggplant Hobo Pack with Lemon

      Spicy Yellow Squash Hobo Pack with Lime

      Sweet Potato–Raisin Hobo Pack

      New Potato Hobo Pack with Pearl Onions and Spinach

      Butternut Squash Hobo Pack with Spinach and Apricots

      Carrot-Ginger Hobo Pack with Scallions

      Tomato Hobo Pack with Basil and Garlic

      Mushroom and Kale Hobo Pack

      Autumn Vegetable Hobo Pack

      Ash-Roasted Garlic




440
POTATO AND EGGPLANT HOBO PACK WITH                                               COOKING TIME

                                                                                 35 to 40 minutes
LEMON
  S E RVE S 6


  4 baking potatoes, washed and thickly sliced
  2 lemons, very thinly sliced
  10 cloves garlic, peeled and smashed
  1 small eggplant, diced small
  1⁄ 2   cup olive oil
  Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


SPICY YELLOW SQUASH HOBO PACK WITH                                               COOKING TIME

                                                                                 20 to 25 minutes
LIME
  S E RVE S 6


  4 small yellow squash, cut lengthwise into sixths
  10 cloves garlic, peeled and smashed
  2 tablespoons minced fresh chile peppers of your choice, or to taste
  1 lime, very thinly sliced
  1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh basil
  1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh cilantro
  2 tablespoons vegetable oil
  2 tablespoons sesame oil
  Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


SWEET POTATO–RAISIN HOBO PACK                                                    COOKING TIME

                                                                                 25 to 30 minutes
  S E RVE S 6


  4 sweet potatoes, washed and quartered lengthwise
  2 red onions, peeled and quartered
  5 stalks celery, diced small
  1⁄ 2   cup dark raisins
  4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter, at room temperature, cut into
     small pieces
  1 ⁄4   cup molasses
  Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




                                                                               H O B O PA C K S     441
COOKING TIME                   NEW POTATO HOBO PACK WITH PEARL
25 to 30 minutes
                               ONIONS AND SPINACH
                                       S E RVE S 6


                                       12 new potatoes (about the size of a golf ball), washed
                                       24 pearl onions, unpeeled, root ends trimmed
                                       1⁄ 2   pound spinach, trimmed, well washed, and dried
                                       1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh sage
                                       1⁄ 3   cup olive oil
                                       1 teaspoon red pepper ﬂakes
                                       Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


COOKING TIME                   BUTTERNUT SQUASH HOBO PACK WITH
35 to 40 minutes
                               SPINACH AND APRICOTS
                                       S E RVE S 6


                                       3 cups butternut squash diced large
                                       1⁄ 2   pound spinach, trimmed, well washed, and dried
                                       1 cup thinly sliced dried apricots
                                       1⁄ 3   cup packed dark brown sugar
                                       4 tablespoons (1 ⁄ 2 stick) unsalted butter, at room temperature, cut into
                                          small pieces
                                       Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


COOKING TIME                   CARROT-GINGER HOBO PACK WITH
25 to 30 minutes
                               SCALLIONS
                                       S E RVE S 6


                                       6 large carrots, peeled and cut into 1-inch rounds
                                       One 2-inch ﬁnger of fresh ginger, peeled and cut into matchsticks
                                       6 scallions (white and green parts), thinly sliced
                                       1⁄ 3   cup soy sauce
                                       1 ⁄4   cup olive oil
                                       Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




442          H OW T O C O O K M E AT
TOMATO HOBO PACK WITH BASIL AND                                                  COOKING TIME

                                                                                 15 to 20 minutes
GARLIC
  S E RVE S 6


  4 tomatoes (about the size of a baseball), cored and quartered
  2 red onions, peeled and quartered
  15 cloves garlic, peeled and smashed
  1⁄ 2   cup roughly chopped fresh basil
  1⁄ 3   cup olive oil
  Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


MUSHROOM AND KALE HOBO PACK                                                      COOKING TIME

                                                                                 15 to 20 minutes
  S E RVE S 4 TO 6


  1 pound white mushrooms (or substitute the exotic mushrooms of your
     choice), trimmed
  2 red onions, peeled and quartered
  10 cloves garlic, peeled and smashed
  1 ⁄4   cup chopped fresh herbs: any one or a combination of parsley, sage,
         rosemary, and/or thyme
  1⁄ 3   cup olive oil
  8 large leaves kale, washed and roughly chopped
  Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste


AUTUMN VEGETABLE HOBO PACK                                                       COOKING TIME

                                                                                 35 to 40 minutes
  S E RVE S 6


  2 red onions, peeled and quartered
  1 medium turnip, peeled and cut into bite-sized pieces
  3 parsnips, peeled and cut into 1-inch rounds
  2 medium beets, peeled and cut into bite-sized pieces
  5 cloves garlic, peeled and smashed
  1 ⁄4   cup roughly chopped fresh herbs: any one or a combination of fresh
         sage, thyme, and/or oregano
  1⁄ 3   cup olive oil
  Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




                                                                               H O B O PA C K S     443
COOKING TIME                   ASH-ROASTED GARLIC
about 35 minutes               This is not exactly a side dish, but roasted garlic has dozens of uses, and
                               cooking it in the ashes gives it great ﬂavor. It’s particularly nice as a condi­
                               ment with grilled steak or lamb chops or as an addition to mashed potatoes.
                               Once the garlic is roasted, just wait until it is cool enough to handle and
                               squeeze the ﬂesh out of each clove.

                                       4 large heads garlic, top quarter sliced off
                                       1 ⁄4   cup extra virgin olive oil
                                       Kosher salt and freshly cracked black pepper to taste




444          H OW T O C O O K M E AT
                                                                                         INDEX




A    corn squash, see squash, acorn   apple(s):                                a hot open-faced veal meat loaf
adobo:                                   -chipotle salsa, cumin-crusted           sandwich with blue cheese-
  Denver lamb ribs, with fresh              grilled boneless pork loin            tomato relish and, 224–25
      pineapple-chipotle glaze,             with grilled avocados and,       asparagus:
      298–99                                331–32                             black pan-seared tournedos
  pork ribs with molasses-chile          green, lazy Sunday pot roast             with crab, A-1 hollandaise
      barbecue sauce, EZ-style,             with caraway and, 69–70               and, 91–92
      348–49                             spiced, panfried brined loin          roasted, 427
African-style beef and tuber stew           chops stuffed with walnuts       au gratin potatoes (gratin
      with toasted spices, 128–29           and Stilton cheese with,              Dauphinois), 410–11
aged meat, 26–27                            358–60                           autumn vegetable hobo pack, 443
Agriculture Department, U.S.             Stilton-stuffed, simple veal        avocado(s):
      (USDA)                                rump roast with, 172–73            -corn salsa, grilled thin pork
  cooking guidelines of, 28           apricot(s):                                 chops with, 374–75
  grading by, 9, 41, 44, 46, 324         butternut squash hobo pack            grilled, cumin-crusted grilled
  meat inspection and, 9                    with spinach and, 442                 boneless pork loin with
almonds:                                 dried, broiled sherried lamb             apple-chipotle salsa and,
  green beans with mushrooms                skewers with green olive              331–32
      and, 429                              dressing and, 294–95
  rice pilaf with currants and,          -lemon chutney, smooth,             Bacon:
      417                                   couscous-stuffed lamb loin         broiled veal loin chop with
Alsatian-style orange-braised veal          with, 264–66                          exotic mushrooms, sherry
      shoulder with sweet-and­           -mint sauce, crown roast of              and, 194–95
      sour braised cabbage and              lamb with saffron rice and,        -cheese stuffed potatoes, 415
      fennel slaw, 186–87                   248–50                             grilled Polynesian-style
anchovies, spicy pan-seared veal         -sausage stufﬁng, roast pork loin        tenderloin tip kebabs with
      loin medallions with green            with rosemary-garlic jus and,         pineapple, peppers and,
      olives and, 205–6                     334–37                                104–5
A-1 (sauce):                          artichoke hearts, sautéed                grill-roasted rib roast (prime
  hollandaise, black pan-seared             medallions of veal with               rib) with potato-garlic hobo
      tournedos with asparagus,             lemon, thyme and, 201–2               pack, sour cream, and bits of,
      crab and, 91–92                 arugula:                                    44–45
  parsley butter, Texas-style            fennel, and oranges under             lamb tongues on toast with
      ground beef casserole with            grilled peppered lamb leg top         tomatoes and, 317–18
      sweet potato crust and,               with white bean-roasted red        lima beans with thyme and,
      138–39                                pepper relish, 260–61                 431



                                                                                                                   445
      bacon (continued )                      lamb shoulder Kentucky-style,          great, 10 steps to, 43, 60, 84, 85,
        old-school Southern-style beef             with chile-vinegar sauce and          119
           stew with corn, tomatoes                sweet-and-sour slaw, 273–74       lean, 12, 37
           and, 130–31                        pork, cheater-style indoor,            No Roll, 41
        pork, and mango skewers with               352–53                            recipes for large tender cuts of,
           guava-chile glaze, grilled,        -rubbed grilled fresh ham center           43–59
           381–82                                  slice with watermelon-            recipes for large tough cuts of,
        seared calf ’s liver with onions,          pineapple salad, 384–85               60–83
           sweet-and-sour Madeira             sauce, molasses-chile, EZ-style        recipes for odd cuts of, 147–58
           sauce and, 237–38                       adobo pork ribs with, 348–49      recipes for small tender cuts of,
        slab, and beef liver kebab,           veal breast with sour                      84–118
           grilled, on cornmeal mush               orange–chipotle barbecue          recipes for small tough cuts of,
           with smoky tomato-bacon                 sauce, Latin-style, 178–79            119–46
           relish, 154–56                     whole beef brisket with                stock, 33
        spring veal and vegetable stew             pastrami-style rub and grainy     variety cuts of, 40; see also beef
           with chervil and, 228–29                mustard-horseradish sauce,            heart; beef tongue; marrow;
        stewed veal riblets with beer,             70–72                                 oxtail(s); tripe stew
           beans and, 219–20                basil:                                 beef, ground, 37–40, 140
        sweet-and-sour dressing, grilled      -crusted meat loaf with brandy,        in basil-crusted meat loaf with
           sweetbreads over wilted                 walnuts, and spicy tomato             brandy, walnuts, and spicy
           spinach with, 236–37                    sauce, 145–46                         tomato sauce, 145–46
        -wrapped broiled ﬁlet mignon          jus, light, rack of veal with          casserole with sweet potato
           with roasted endive and                 chestnut stufﬁng, brandied            crust and A-1 parsley butter,
           mushrooms and blue cheese               oranges and, 166–68                   Texas-style, 138–39
           butter, 88–89                      -sun-dried tomato relish, grilled      Indian spiced beef-stuffed red
      baked stuffed potatoes, 415                  pork and ﬁg skewers with,             onions with fresh coconut-
      balsamic:                                    382–83                                ginger chutney and simple
        -braised pot roast with               tomato hobo pack with garlic               yogurt sauce, 140–42
           tomatoes, lemons, raisins,              and, 443                        beef brisket, 6, 38, 40
           and black olive–pine nut         batter-fried onion rings, 437            barbecued whole, with
           relish, 66–68                    bean, fava, veal, and sausage stew           pastrami-style rub and grainy
        -and-Chianti-braised lamb                  with lemony greens, 230–31            mustard-horseradish sauce,
           shanks over creamy               bean(s), black:                              70–72
           Parmesan polenta with              and beef stew with Brazilian           braised with sauerkraut,
           roasted tomato-garlic relish,           ﬂavors and fried plantains,           72–73
           270–72                                  124–25                          beef chuck, 6, 37–39
        -glazed seared top blade chuck        and rice, Latin-style, 422             and beef stew with onions,
           steaks with spinach, lemon,        spicy Latin, 423                           peppers, and tomatoes, and
           and olive oil, 108–9             beans, green:                                crunchy parsley–bread crumb
        onions, smoky, herb-crusted           eggplant, and peppers with                 shake, old-style, 122–23
           grilled top round steak                 lamb in hoisin-ginger sauce,      and black bean stew with
           “London broil-style” with               stir-fried, 299–300                   Brazilian ﬂavors and fried
           maître d’hôtel butter and,         with mushrooms and almonds,                plantains, 124–25
           106–7                                   429                               ground, 37–38, 140
        raisins, grilled veal ﬂank steak    beans, lima, with bacon and              and tuber stew with toasted
           on Texas toast with yellow              thyme, 431                            spices, African-style, 128–29
           tomato chutney and,              bean(s), white:                        beef chuck eye roast, 38
           216–17                             lamb, and leek stew with               Latin-ﬂavored roasted, with
      bananas, grill-roasted rum-brined            oregano, walnuts, and hard            lime-chipotle marmalade and
           fresh ham with mango salsa              cheese, 305–6                         fried plantains, 56–57
           and grilled pineapples and,        -roasted red pepper relish,          beef eye of round, 38
           328–30                                  grilled peppered lamb leg top     garlic-studded roast, with sweet
      barbecue(d) (BBQ):                           on arugula, fennel, and               potatoes and South American
        authentic eastern North                    oranges with, 260–61                  parsley-caper sauce, 54–55
           Carolina pork butt on buns         salad, Mediterranean, 424            beef heart, Peruvian-style you
           with Tidewater slaw,               stewed veal riblets with beer,             gotta have, 149–50
           350–51                                  bacon and, 219–20               beef liver, see liver
        beef ribs with hot, sweet, and      beef, 35–158                           beef loin, 5, 6, 37, 38, 39
           sour bone sauce, Flintstones­      cuts of, 5–8, 37–40                    grill-roasted whole, with yellow
           style, 80–81                       grades of, 9, 41, 44, 46                   tomato-ginger jam, 52–53




446   INDEX
  sage-rubbed roasted, with              old-school Southern-style, with      blue cheese:
     shallot-bourbon sauce, 50–51            corn, tomatoes, and bacon,          butter, broiled bacon-wrapped
  see also beef tenderloin; speciﬁc          130–31                                 ﬁlet mignon with roasted
     steaks                              Señor Sanchez’s Salvadoran                 endive and mushrooms and,
beef rib(s), 6, 37, 38                       soup of kings with short               88–89
  with hot, sweet, and sour bone             ribs, corn, and plantains,          -Madeira sauce, seared veal
     sauce, Flintstones-style BBQ,           133–34                                 tenderloins over watercress
     80–81                               the world’s hottest chili, with            and walnuts with, 190–91
  see also beef short ribs;                  Scotch bonnet peppers,              mashed potatoes, 413
     Delmonico (rib-eye) steaks;             yucca, and a cucumber-              -tomato relish, a hot open-faced
     rib roast                               mango coolant, 131–33                  veal meat loaf sandwich with
beef roasts, 5, 38                     beef stew meat, 38, 39                       arugula and, 224–25
  see also beef rump roast; pot          in K.L.-style gingered beef stew        see also Stilton
     roast; rib roast                        with red onion-lime sambal,      bok choy, soy-braised, sautéed
beef round, 6, 37, 38                        126–27                                 pork scallopini over scallion
  in the world’s hottest chili, with     in old-school Southern-style               lo mein with, 368–69
     Scotch bonnet peppers,                  beef stew with corn,             Boston butt, 4, 322, 323
     yucca, and a cucumber-                  tomatoes, and bacon,                in soy-braised, hoisin-glazed
     mango coolant, 131–33                   130–31                                 pork shoulder roast with
  see also bottom round steak(s)       beef tenderloin, 38, 39                      sesame-ginger dipping sauce,
beef rump roast, 38, 40                  tip kebabs with bacon,                     342–43
  on a bed of red onions, leeks,             pineapple, and peppers,          bottom round steak(s), 38
     and new potatoes, 58–59                 grilled Polynesian-style,           with butternut squash and
  bottom round, in old-school                104–5                                  oregano, orange-and-chile­
     Yankee pot roast with root          see also Châteaubriand                     stewed, 120–21
     vegetables and fresh tomato-      beef tongue hashing with turnips          with eggplant and ginger, sweet-
     fennel relish, 65–66                    and Swiss chard, a severe,             and-sour braised, 82–83
beef short ribs, 13, 38                      156–57                           bourbon:
  black pepper–crusted wine-           beef (top) blade steak, 7, 38, 39         -and-honey glazed roasted loin
     braised, with garlic and            Cuban-style braised, with olives,          of veal with crusty sweet
     turnips, 74–75                          raisins, and fried sweet               potatoes and Smithﬁeld ham-
  with fennel seeds and oregano,             potatoes, 63–64                        raisin jus, 170–71
     orange-braised, 76–77               seared balsamic-glazed, with            -shallot sauce, sage-rubbed
  with ginger, chiles, and quick             spinach, lemon, and olive oil,         roasted loin of beef with,
     kimchee, Korean-style                   108–9                                  50–51
     grilled, 117–18                   beef top round (steak), 38, 39         brains, calf ’s:
  Señor Sanchez’s Salvadoran             in aromatic ginger and beef             meunière, 234–35
     soup of kings with corn,                broth with hoisin and               scrambled eggs on toast with
     plantains and, 133–34                   traditional Southeast Asian            trufﬂe oil and, 233–34
beef shoulder, 38                            garnishes, 136–37                braised, braising, 19–21
  in balsamic-braised pot roast          herb-crusted grilled “London            balsamic pot roast with
     with tomatoes, lemons,                  broil-style,” with maître              tomatoes, lemons, raisins,
     raisins, and black olive–pine           d’hôtel butter and smoky               and black olive-pine nut
     nut relish, 66–68                       balsamic onions, 106–7                 relish, 66–68
  old-fashioned braised, with            in the world’s hottest chili, with      beef brisket with sauerkraut,
     herbed potato dumplings and             Scotch bonnet peppers,                 72–73
     horseradish sauce, 61–63                yucca, and a cucumber-              beef cuts for, 38
beef stew, 38, 39, 120–34                    mango coolant, 131–33               beef with herbed potato
  African-style, with tubers and       beer:                                        dumplings and horseradish
     toasted spices, 128–29              and beef stew with onions,                 sauce, old-fashioned, 61–63
  with beer, onions, peppers, and            peppers, and tomatoes, old-         -Chianti-and-balsamic lamb
     tomatoes, old-style chunky,             style chunky, and crunchy              shanks over creamy
     and crunchy parsley–bread               parsley–bread crumb shake,             Parmesan polenta with
     crumb shake, 122–23                     122–23                                 roasted tomato-garlic relish,
  with Brazilian ﬂavors, and fried       -braised veal breast with                  270–72
     plantains, black bean and,              Macumber turnips and                creamy garlic-Parmesan
     124–25                                  greens, 180–81                         vinaigrette, grilled double-
  hangover-style tripe, 151–52           in fried onion rings, 437                  thick lamb loin chops with
  K.L.-style gingered, with red          stewed veal riblets with bacon,            roasted peppers and onions
     onion-lime sambal, 126–27               beans and, 219–20                      and, 282–83



                                                                                                         INDEX      447
      braised, braising (continued)            veal shank with raisins and             blue cheese, broiled bacon-
        Cuban-style beef blade steak              parsley, EZ-style sherry-,              wrapped ﬁlet mignon with
           with olives, raisins, and fried        184–85                                  roasted endive and
           sweet potatoes, 63–64               -in-vinegar ﬂank steak with                mushrooms and, 88–89
        fennel, 438                               cabbage, corn, and yucca             brown, Brussels sprouts in,
        great, 10 steps to, 60, 177, 268,         salad, Puerto Rican,                    428
           341                                    77–79                                maître d’hôtel, herb-crusted
        lazy Sunday pot roast with             -in-wine black pepper-crusted              grilled top round steak
           caraway and green apples,              short ribs with garlic and              “London broil-style” with
           69–70                                  turnips, 74–75                          smoky balsamic onions and,
        leeks, 430                             see also barbecue(d)                       106–7
        -mango lamb shoulder with            branded meat, 10, 42                    butternut squash, see squash,
           sweet toasted spices and          brandy(ied):                                 butternut
           tomato-cucumber relish,             basil-crusted meat loaf with
           275–77                                 walnuts, spicy tomato sauce        Cabbage:
        North African-style lamb shanks           and, 145–46                           corn, and yucca salad with
           with lemons, tomatoes, and          oranges, rack of veal with                   Puerto Rican vinegar-braised
           green olives, 269–70                   chestnut stufﬁng, light basil             ﬂank steak, 77–79
        old-school Yankee pot roast               jus and, 166–68                       and fennel slaw, sweet-and-sour
           with root vegetables and          Brazilian ﬂavors, beef and black               braised, orange-braised veal
           fresh tomato-fennel relish,            bean stew with fried                      shoulder with, 186–87
           65–66                                  plantains and, 124–25                 smoky sesame, stir-fried sirloin
        orange short ribs with fennel        bread crumb-parsley shake, old-                tips with ginger, peanuts, and
           seeds and oregano, 76–77               style chunky beef and beer                scallions over, 101–2
        orange veal shoulder, with                stew with onions, peppers,            see also sauerkraut; slaw
           sweet-and-sour braised                 and tomatoes and, 122–23           cabbage, red:
           cabbage and fennel slaw,          bread salad, 357                           German-style braised, 434
           186–87                            broccoli rabe with garlic and oil,         slaw, sweet-and-sour, orange-
        oxtails in red wine over                  430                                       stewed country-style pork
           spaghetti with garlic and         broccoli with garlic and oil,                  ribs with, 387–88
           spinach, 143–44                        sautéed, 430                       calf ’s brains, see brains, calf ’s
        pepper-crusted veal riblets with     broiled, broiling, 21–24                calf ’s liver, 163
           red onions over mushroom            bacon-wrapped ﬁlet mignon                seared, with bacon, onions, and
           risotto, 220–21                        with roasted endive and                   sweet-and-sour Madeira
        -pot likker fresh ham hocks with          mushrooms and blue cheese                 sauce, 237–38
           collard greens and potatoes,           butter, 88–89                      candied sweet potatoes, 436
           403–4                               double-thick lamb rib chops           caper(s):
        red cabbage, German-style,                with slicked-up store-bought          -lemon sauce, veal birdies
           434                                    mint jelly sauce, 284–85                  Tidewater-style, with
        -in-red wine pork steaks with          great, 10 steps to, 85, 189, 279,            Smithﬁeld ham, backﬁn crab
           peaches, cinnamon, and                 355                                       and, 208–9
           couscous, 344–45                    lamb kidneys with grainy                 -parsley sauce, garlic-studded
        -in-soy, hoisin-glazed pork               mustard sauce and watercress              roast eye of round with sweet
           shoulder roast with sesame-            and tomato salad, 316–17                  potatoes and, 54–55
           ginger dipping sauce, 342–43        sherried lamb skewers with               simple brown veal stew with
        -in-soy bok choy, sautéed pork            dried apricots and green olive            tomatoes, peppers and,
           scallopini over scallion lo            dressing, 294–95                          227–28
           mein with, 368–69                   veal loin chop with exotic            caraway, lazy Sunday pot roast
        stewing compared with, 20, 24             mushrooms, bacon, and                     with green apples and, 69–70
        sweet-and-sour bottom round               sherry, 194–95                     carrot(s):
           steak with eggplant and           browning, see pan-seared; searing,         -ginger hobo pack with
           ginger, 82–83                          seared                                    scallions, 442
        techniques for, 20–21                Brussels sprouts in brown butter,          roasted, 435
        testing for doneness and, 15, 21          428                                cashew slaw, sautéed pork cutlets
        veal breast with Macumber            Buffalo-style grilled baby back ribs,          with chile ﬂavor booster and,
           turnips and greens, beer-,             380                                       364–65
           180–81                            butter:                                 casseroles:
        veal shanks and tomato with            A-1 parsley, Texas-style ground          layered lamb, onion, and potato,
           pumpkin risotto and lemon-             beef casserole with sweet                 with red wine, 309–11
           pistachio power pack, 182–84           potato crust and, 138–39              leftover lamb, 272, 277




448   INDEX
   Texas-style ground beef, with          spicy stewed pork with                 cinnamon, red wine-braised pork
      sweet potato crust and A-1              eggplant, sesame spinach                 steaks with peaches,
      parsley butter, 138–39                  and, 398–99                              couscous and, 344–45
catsup, pineapple-ginger,                 -vinegar sauce, barbecued lamb         coconut (milk):
      macadamia nut-crusted pork              shoulder Kentucky-style,              -ginger chutney, fresh Indian-
      chops with, 360–61                      with sweet-and-sour slaw                 spiced beef-stuffed red onions
Châteaubriand, 38                             and, 273–74                              with simple yogurt sauce
   cumin-crusted roasted, with            West Indies–style pork stew                  and, 140–42
      wild mushrooms and                      with plantains, lime and,             Malaysian-inspired pork stew
      Madeira, 48–49                          388–89                                   with aromatic garnishes and,
cheater-style indoor barbecued            see also chipotle                            396–97
      pork, 352–53                     chili, with Scotch bonnet peppers,           rice, 418–19
Cheddar (cheese):                             yucca, and a cucumber-             cognac-green peppercorn sauce,
   -bacon stuffed potatoes, 415               mango coolant, the world’s               mango-stuffed veal birdies
   hominy with chiles, sour cream             hottest, 131–33                          with, 210–11
      and, 438                         china cap, 30                             collard greens, pot likker-braised
   -jalapeño grits, spicy pork stew    chipotle:                                       fresh ham hocks with
      with tomatoes and okra over,        -apple salsa, cumin-crusted                  potatoes and, 403–4
      390–91                                  grilled boneless pork loin         conﬁt, cherry tomato-ginger,
cheese:                                       with grilled avocados and,               garlic-studded, mustard-
   hard, lamb, leek, and white                331–32                                   crusted roast shoulder of
      bean stew with oregano,             -lime marmalade, Latin-ﬂavored               lamb with rosemary jus and,
      walnuts and, 305–6                      roasted beef chuck eye roast             266–67
   see also blue cheese; Cheddar;             with fried plantains and,          cooking methods, 16–26
      Gruyère; Parmesan; Stilton              56–57                                 see also speciﬁc methods
chervil, spring veal and vegetable        -pineapple glaze, fresh, Denver        coriander-crusted, pickled corn-
      stew with bacon and,                    lamb ribs adobo with, 298–99             stuffed double-thick pork
      228–29                              -sour orange barbecue sauce,                 chops with peach chutney,
chestnut stufﬁng, rack of veal with           Latin-style barbecued veal               grilled, 356–57
      brandied oranges, light basil           breast with, 178–79                corned beef and sweet potato hash
      jus and, 166–68                  Choice meat, 9, 41, 246                         with red wine–caramelized
Chianti-and-balsamic-braised lamb      chutney:                                        onions, 148–49
      shanks over creamy                  fresh coconut-ginger, Indian-          corn(meal):
      Parmesan polenta with                   spiced beef-stuffed red onions        -avocado salsa, grilled thin pork
      roasted tomato garlic relish,           with simple yogurt sauce                 chops with, 374–75
      270–72                                  and, 140–42                           cabbage, and yucca salad,
chile(s):                                 nectarine, grilled boneless pork             Puerto Rican vinegar-braised
   ﬂavor booster, sautéed pork                loin chops with green                    ﬂank steak with, 77–79
      cutlets with cashew slaw and,           olive–red onion relish and,           on the cob, grilled, 433
      364–65                                  370–71                                creamed, 433
   -green olive relish, lime-soaked,      nectarine-ginger, grilled veal            hominy with Cheddar, chiles,
      cumin-crusted grilled skirt             shoulder chops with, and                 and sour cream, 438
      steak with, 112–13                      cucumbers with mint and               mush with smoky tomato-
   -guava glaze, grilled pork,                yogurt, 198–99                           bacon relish, grilled beef liver
      bacon, and mango skewers            peach, grilled coriander-crusted,            and slab bacon kebab on,
      with, 381–82                            pickled corn-stuffed double-             154–56
   hominy with Cheddar, sour                  thick pork chops with,                old-school Southern-style beef
      cream and, 438                          356–57                                   stew with tomatoes, bacon
   Korean-style grilled short ribs        smooth apricot-lemon,                        and, 130–31
      with ginger, quick kimchee              couscous-stuffed lamb loin            pickled, -stuffed grilled
      and, 117–18                             with, 264–66                             coriander-crusted pork
   -lychee sambal, ginger-rubbed          yellow tomato, grilled veal ﬂank             chops with peach chutney,
      rack of pork with, 337–38               steak on Texas toast with                356–57
   -molasses barbecue sauce, EZ-              balsamic raisins and, 216–17          in spicy pork stew with
      style adobo pork ribs with,      cider, hard, -raisin sauce, maple-              tomatoes and okra over
      348–49                                  glazed fresh ham with,                   jalapeño-Cheddar grits,
   -and-orange-stewed bottom                  326–27                                   390–91
      round steaks with butternut      cilantro-red onion salsa, grill-roasted      Señor Sanchez’s Salvadoran
      squash and oregano,                     bone-in leg of lamb with                 soup of kings with short ribs,
      120–21                                  grilled peaches and, 258–59              plantains and, 133–34



                                                                                                              INDEX       449
      corn(meal) (continued)                 currants, rice pilaf with almonds      dumplings, herbed potato, old-
         white veal stew with                     and, 417                             fashioned braised beef with
            mushrooms, sherry and,           curry(ied):                               horseradish sauce and, 61–63
            225–26                             gingered pork, with seven
         see also polenta                         garnishes, 400–401                Eggplant:
      couscous:                                lamb stew with okra and                -ﬁg relish, smoky, crusty grilled
         red wine-braised pork steaks             tomatoes, 308–9                        butterﬂied leg of lamb with,
            with peaches, cinnamon and,      cuts of meat, 3–8                           254–56
            344–45                             beef, 5–8, 37–40                       green beans, and peppers with
         -stuffed lamb loin with smooth        for braising, 19–20                       lamb in hoisin-ginger sauce,
            apricot-lemon chutney,             for grilling, sautéing, and               stir-fried, 299–300
            264–66                                broiling, 22                        and lamb stew with tomatoes,
      crab:                                    lamb, 5–8, 243, 244–45                    raisins, and saffron, Persian-
         backﬁn, veal birdies Tidewater-       pork, 5–8, 322–24                         style, 302–3
            style, with Smithﬁeld ham,         primal, 4, 5, 37, 38, 41               planks, smoky, with parsley-
            lemon-caper sauce and,             for roasting, 16                          coated grilled lamb loin and
            208–9                              for stewing, 24                           tomato-ﬁg hobo pack,
         black pan-seared tournedos            subprimals, 4                             288–89
            with asparagus, A-1                veal, 5–8, 160–63                      planks under grilled lamb leg
            hollandaise and,                   see also speciﬁc cuts                     steaks with mint-yogurt
            91–92                                                                        sauce and cucumber-red
      creamed corn, 433                      Date(s):                                    onion relish, 296–97
      creamed spinach, 431                     -sage power pack, molasses-            and potato hobo pack with
      croutons, big fried polenta, veal           glazed pork tenderloin with            lemon, 441
            stir-fry on, 212–13                   seared sweet-and-sour red           spicy stewed pork with chiles,
      Cuban-style braised beef blade              onions and, 376–77                     sesame spinach and, 398–99
            steak with olives, raisins,        spicy lamb-and-rice-stuffed            sweet-and-sour braised bottom
            and fried sweet potatoes,             squash with mint, pine nuts            round steak with ginger and,
            63–64                                 and, 313–14                            82–83
      cucumber(s):                           deglazing, 21                          eggs, scrambled, on toast with
         -mango coolant, the world’s         Delmonico (rib-eye) steaks, 38, 39,         calf ’s brains and trufﬂe oil,
            hottest chili, with Scotch            40                                     233–34
            bonnet peppers, yucca and,         pan-seared, with roasted ﬁgs         empanadas, 64
            131–33                                and sherry-parsley sauce,         endive, roasted, broiled bacon-
         with mint and yogurt, grilled            86–87                                  wrapped ﬁlet mignon with
            veal shoulder chops with         Denver lamb ribs adobo with fresh           mushrooms and blue cheese
            nectarine-ginger chutney              pineapple chipotle glaze,              butter and, 88–89
            and, 198–99                           298–99
         -red onion relish, grilled lamb     Diane-style pan-seared thin strip      Fat:
            leg steaks on eggplant planks         loin steak, 94–95                    braising and, 20
            with mint-yogurt sauce and,      doneness, testing for, 15, 26             intermuscular, 12
            296–97                             of beef, 39                             intramuscular (marbling), 9, 12,
         -tomato relish, mango-braised         of braises, 15, 21                         20, 41, 161
            lamb shoulder with sweet           in grilling, sautéing, and              lamb, 243
            toasted spices and,                   broiling, 22–23                      saturated, 2, 37
            275–77                             of roasts, 15, 19                    fava bean, veal, and sausage stew
      cumin:                                 dressing:                                    with lemony greens, 230–31
         -crusted, lime-soaked grilled         ginger-lime, Southeast               fennel (seeds):
            skirt steak with green olive-         Asian–style grilled skirt steak      arugula, and oranges under
            chile relish, 112–13                  with aromatic greens and,               grilled peppered lamb leg top
         -crusted grilled boneless pork           110–11                                  with white bean–roasted red
            loin with grilled avocados         green olive, broiled sherried              pepper relish, 260–61
            and apple-chipotle salsa,             lamb skewers with dried              braised, 438
            331–32                                apricots and, 294–95                 and cabbage slaw, sweet-and­
         -crusted roasted Châteaubriand        sour orange-oregano, grilled               sour braised, with orange-
            with wild mushrooms and               pork loin ﬁllets on Latin-style         braised veal shoulder,
            Madeira, 48–49                        salad with, 366–67                      186–87
         -raisin vinaigrette, grilled lamb     sweet-and-sour bacon, grilled           -crusted ﬂank steak with
            and peach skewers with,               sweetbreads over wilted                 orange–black olive relish and
            293–94                                spinach with, 236–37                    spicy mint honey, 114–15




450   INDEX
   fragrant winter pork stew with       rice, pork, 373                        German-style dishes, 160
      pears, sauerkraut and, 394–95     sweet potatoes, Cuban-style            ginger(ed):
   orange-braised short ribs with          braised beef blade steak              and beef broth with hoisin and
      oregano and, 76–77                   with olives, raisins and,                 traditional Southeast Asian
   -tomato relish, fresh, old-school       63–64                                     garnishes, aromatic, 136–37
      Yankee pot roast with root        sweet potatoes, mango-stewed             beef stew K.L.-style with red
      vegetables and, 65–66                pork with, 392–93                         onion-lime sambal, 126–27
ﬁg:                                                                              -carrot hobo pack with
   -eggplant relish, smoky, crusty     Garlic:                                       scallions, 442
      grilled butterﬂied leg of lamb    ash-roasted, 444                         -cherry tomato conﬁt, garlic-
      with, 254–56                      black pepper–crusted wine-                   studded, mustard-crusted
   grilled veal T-bones with a hobo        braised short ribs with                   roasted shoulder of lamb
      pack of prosciutto, spinach          turnips and, 74–75                        with rosemary jus and,
      and, 200–201                      broccoli rabe with oil and, 430              266–67
   and pork skewers, grilled, with      -Parmesan vinaigrette, creamy            -coconut chutney, fresh, Indian-
      sun-dried tomato-basil relish,       braised, grilled double-thick             spiced beef-stuffed red onions
      382–83                               lamb loin chops with roasted              with simple yogurt sauce
   roasted, pan-seared Delmonico           peppers and onions and,                   and, 140–42
      with sherry-parsley sauce            282–83                                -hoisin sauce, stir-fried lamb
      and, 86–87                        -potato hobo pack, sour cream,               with green beans, eggplant,
   -tomato hobo pack, parsley-             and bacon bits, grill-roasted rib         and peppers in, 299–300
      coated grilled lamb loin with        roast (prime rib) with, 44–45         Korean-style grilled short ribs
      smoky eggplant planks and,        quick-sautéed spinach with, 427              with chiles, quick kimchee
      288–89                            red wine–braised oxtails over                and, 117–18
ﬁlet mignon, 5, 38, 39                     spaghetti with spinach and,            -lime dressing, Southeast
   broiled bacon-wrapped, with             143–44                                    Asian-style grilled skirt steak
      roasted endive and                roasted-, mashed potatoes, 413               with aromatic greens and,
      mushrooms and blue cheese         -roasted tomatoes, very                      110–11
      butter, 88–89                        impressive roasted lamb               -nectarine chutney, grilled veal
ﬂank steak, 39, 116                        saddle with peach-                        shoulder chops with
   fennel-crusted, with orange–            pomegranate sauce and,                    cucumbers with mint and
      black olive relish and spicy         262–64                                    yogurt and, 198–99
      mint honey, 114–15                -roasted tomato relish, Chianti-         -peanut power pack, white
   Puerto Rican vinegar-braised,           and-balsamic-braised lamb                 pepper–crusted pork loin
      with cabbage, corn, and              shanks over creamy                        chops with, 363–64
      yucca salad, 77–79                   Parmesan polenta with,                peanuts, scallions, and, sirloin
Flintstones-style BBQ beef ribs            270–72                                    tips stir-fried with, over
      with hot, sweet, and sour         -rosemary jus, roast pork loin               smoky sesame cabbage, 101–2
      bone sauce, 80–81                    with apricot-sausage stufﬁng          -pineapple catsup, macadamia
fond, 20–21                                and, 334–37                               nut-crusted pork chops with,
freezing, 27, 42, 68, 144, 246, 274,    -sage pork butt roast with                   360–61
      324, 351                             roasted pineapple and onions          pork curry with seven
French fries, 411                          and sweet mustard sauce,                  garnishes, 400–401
French-style dishes, 160                   339–40                                -rubbed rack of pork with chile­
fried, fried food:                      sautéed broccoli with oil and, 430           lychee sambal, 337–38
   French fries, 411                    straight-up roasted whole leg of         -sesame dipping sauce, soy-
   hash browns, 412                        lamb over potatoes and                    braised, hoisin-glazed pork
   home fries, 412                         onions with lemon, oregano                shoulder roast with, 342–43
   okra, crispy, 429                       and, 252–63                           sweet-and-sour braised bottom
   onion rings, butter-, 437            -studded, mustard-crusted                    round steak with eggplant
   panfried veal cutlets in the            roasted shoulder of lamb                  and, 82–83
      German style, 206–7                  with cherry tomato-ginger             -yellow tomato jam, grill-
   plantains, beef and black bean          conﬁt and rosemary jus,                   roasted whole loin of beef
      stew with Brazilian ﬂavors           266–67                                    with, 52–53
      and, 124–25                       -studded roast eye of round            grades of meat, 9, 41, 44, 46, 164,
   plantains, Latin-ﬂavored roasted        with sweet potatoes and                   246, 324
      beef chuck eye roast with            South American parsley-             grape(s):
      lime-chipotle marmalade              caper sauce, 54–55                    green, -parsley relish, grilled
      and, 56–57                        tomato hobo pack with basil                  peppered lamb loin chops
   rice, basic, 420                        and, 443                                  with, 280–81



                                                                                                           INDEX       451
      grape(s) (continued )                  fennel-crusted ﬂank steak with         pork tenderloin on a salad of
         roasted red, hazelnut-crusted          orange-black olive relish and           grilled potatoes and red
            veal tenderloin with port and,      spicy mint honey, 114–15                onions, 378–79
            192–93                           great, 10 steps to, 84, 188, 278,      sirloin steak high plains
      gratin Dauphinois (au gratin              354                                     drifter–style, 98–99
            potatoes), 410–11                herb-crusted top round steak           sliced skirt steak on Greek salad,
      Greek:                                    “London broil-style” with               113–14
         salad, grilled lamb tenderloins        maître d’hôtel butter and           spice-rubbed lamb skewers with
            with grilled pita on, 285–86        smoky balsamic onions,                  peanut-herb power pack
         salad, sliced grilled skirt steak      106–7                                   (Indobob), 291–92
            on, 113–14                       hoisin-glazed pork blade chops         sweetbreads over wilted spinach
         -style grilled lamb shoulder           with spicy Korean vegetables,           with sweet-and-sour bacon
            chops, 287                          372–73                                  dressing, 236–37
      green beans, see beans, green          Korean-style short ribs with           techniques for, 23–24
      greens:                                   ginger, chiles, and quick           thin pork chops with avocado-
         aromatic, Southeast Asian–style        kimchee, 117–18                         corn salsa, 374–75
            grilled skirt steak with         lamb and peach skewers with            traditional dry-rubbed St.
            ginger-lime dressing and,           cumin-raisin vinaigrette,               Louis–style pork spareribs,
            110–11                              293–94                                  346–47
         beer-braised veal breast with       lamb leg steaks on eggplant            veal, sweet potato, and red
            Macumber turnips and,               planks with mint-yogurt                 onion kebabs in the piccata
            180–81                              sauce and cucumber-red                  style, 214–15
         collard, pot likker–braised fresh      onion relish, 296–97                veal ﬂank steak on Texas toast
            ham hocks with potatoes          lamb shoulder chops, Greek-                with yellow tomato chutney
            and, 403–4                          style, 287                              and balsamic raisins, 216–17
         lemony, veal, sausage, and fava     lamb tenderloins on Greek salad        veal loin chops with spicy green
            bean stew with, 230–31              with grilled pita, 285–86               olive and sun-dried tomato
      grilling, grilled, 21–24               lime-soaked, cumin-crusted                 relish, 196–97
         baby back ribs, Buffalo-style,         skirt steak with green              veal rib chops with smoky
            380                                 olive–chile relish, 112–13              portobello relish, simple,
         BBQ-rubbed fresh ham center         Mr. Perfect steak for two,                 197–98
            slice with watermelon­              89–90                               veal shoulder chops with
            pineapple salad, 384–85          parsley-coated lamb loin with              nectarine-ginger chutney and
         beef liver and slab bacon kebab        smoky eggplant planks and               cucumbers with mint and
            on cornmeal mush with               tomato-ﬁg hobo pack,                    yogurt, 198–99
            smoky tomato-bacon relish,          288–89                              veal T-bones with a hobo pack
            154–56                           pepper-crusted strip loin steak            of ﬁg, prosciutto, and
         beef salad, Laotian-style              with homemade steak sauce               spinach, 200–201
            aromatic, 102–3                     and mushroom hobo packs,            white pepper-crusted black-and­
         boneless pork loin chops with          96–98                                   blue steak stuffed with spicy
            green olive-red onion relish     peppered lamb leg top on                   sesame spinach with soy-
            and nectarine chutney,              arugula, fennel, and oranges            wasabi dipping sauce, 93–94
            370–71                              with white bean–roasted red      grill-roasted:
         butterﬂied leg of lamb, crusty,        pepper relish, 260–61               bone-in leg of lamb with grilled
            with smoky eggplant-ﬁg           peppered lamb loin chops with              peaches and red onion-
            relish, 254–56                      green grape-parsley relish,             cilantro salsa, 258–59
         coriander-crusted, pickled corn­       280–81                              rib roast (prime rib) with
            stuffed double-thick pork        Polynesian-style tenderloin tip            potato-garlic hobo pack, sour
            chops with peach chutney,           kebabs with bacon,                      cream, and bacon bits, 44–45
            356–57                              pineapple, and peppers,             rum-brined fresh ham with
         corn on the cob, 433                   104–5                                   mango salsa and grilled
         cumin-crusted boneless pork         pork, bacon, and mango                     pineapples and bananas,
            loin with grilled avocados          skewers with guava-chile                328–30
            and apple-chipotle salsa,           glaze, 381–82                       whole loin of beef with yellow
            331–32                           pork and ﬁg skewers with sun-              tomato-ginger jam, 52–53
         double-thick lamb loin chops           dried tomato–basil relish,       grits:
            with roasted peppers and            382–83                              jalapeño-Cheddar, spicy pork
            onions and creamy braised        pork loin ﬁllets on Latin-style            stew with tomatoes and okra
            garlic-Parmesan vinaigrette,        salad with sour orange-                 over, 390–91
            282–83                              oregano dressing, 366–67            leftover, 391




452   INDEX
ground meat:                              -crusted grilled top round steak   home fries, 412
  safety concerns with, 28                   “London broil-style” with       hominy with Cheddar, chiles, and
  see also beef, ground; lamb,               maître d’hôtel butter and             sour cream, 438
     ground; veal, ground                    smoky balsamic onions,          honey:
Gruyère, in au gratin potatoes               106–7                             -and-bourbon-glazed roasted
     (gratin Dauphinois),                 -peanut power pack, spice-               loin of veal with crusty sweet
     410–11                                  rubbed grilled lamb skewers           potatoes and Smithﬁeld ham-
guava-chile glaze, grilled pork,             with (Indobob), 291–92                raisin jus, 170–71
     bacon, and mango skewers             potato dumplings and                 spicy mint, fennel-crusted ﬂank
     with, 381–82                            horseradish sauce, old-               steak with orange-black olive
                                             fashioned braised beef with,          relish and, 114–15
Ham, fresh, 322                              61–63                           hoppin’ John, 421
  BBQ-rubbed grilled center-slice,        see also speciﬁc herbs             horseradish:
     with watermelon-pineapple          hobo packs, 439–44                     -grainy mustard sauce,
     salad, 384–85                        ash-roasted garlic, 444                  barbecued whole beef brisket
  grill-roasted rum-brined, with          autumn vegetable, 443                    with pastrami-style rub and,
     mango salsa and grilled              butternut squash, spinach, and           70–72
     pineapples and bananas,                 apricots, 442                     mashed potatoes, 413
     328–30                               carrot-ginger-scallions, 442         -mustard sauce, seared veal
  maple-glazed, with hard                 of ﬁg, prosciutto, and spinach,          kidneys with roasted pears
     cider–raisin sauce, 326–27              grilled veal T-bones with,            and, 239–40
ham, Smithﬁeld, 319–20                       200–201                           sauce, old-fashioned braised
  -raisin jus, honey-and-bourbon­         mushroom, pepper-crusted                 beef with herbed potato
     glazed roasted loin of veal             grilled strip loin steak with         dumplings and, 61–63
     with crusty sweet potatoes              homemade steak sauce and,       hot, sweet, and sour bone sauce,
     and, 170–71                             96–98                                 Flintstones-style BBQ beef
  veal birdies Tidewater-style,           mushroom and kale, 443                   ribs with, 80–81
     with backﬁn crab, lemon-             new potato, pearl onions and
     caper sauce and, 208–9                  spinach, 442                    Indian:
ham hocks, 322, 323                       potato, eggplant, and lemon,          -spiced beef-stuffed red onions
  with collard greens and                    441                                   with fresh coconut-ginger
     potatoes, pot likker-braised         potato-garlic, grill-roasted rib         chutney and simple yogurt
     fresh, 403–4                            roast (prime rib) with sour           sauce, 140–42
  in Hoppin’ John, 421                       cream, bacon bits and, 44–45       -spiced green split peas with
  smoked, with Indian-spiced              spicy yellow squash and lime,            smoked ham hocks,
     green split peas, 404–6                 441                                   404–6
hanger steak, 39, 116                     sweet potato-raisin, 441           Indobob: spice-rubbed grilled
hangover-style tripe stew, 151–52         on toast, marrow, 153                    lamb skewers with peanut-
hash:                                     tomato, basil, and garlic, 443           herb power pack,
  corned beef and sweet potato,           tomato-ﬁg, parsley-coated                291–92
     with red wine-caramelized               grilled lamb loin with smoky    Irish lamb stew, straight-up, 303–4
     onions, 148–49                          eggplant planks and, 288–89
  a severe tongue hashing with          hoisin (sauce):                      Jalapeño-Cheddar grits, spicy
     turnips and Swiss chard,             aromatic ginger and beef broth           pork stew with tomatoes and
     156–57                                  with traditional Southeast            okra over, 390–91
hash browns, 412                             Asian garnishes and, 136–37     jam, yellow tomato-ginger, grill-
Hawaiian-style macadamia                  -ginger sauce, stir-fried lamb           roasted whole loin of beef
     nut–crusted pork chops with             with green beans, eggplant,           with, 52–53
     pineapple-ginger catsup,                and peppers in, 299–300         jus:
     360–61                               -glazed, soy-braised pork             light basil, rack of veal with
hazelnut-crusted veal tenderloin             shoulder roast with sesame-           chestnut stufﬁng, brandied
     with roasted grapes and port,           ginger dipping sauce, 342–43          oranges and, 166–68
     192–93                               -glazed grilled pork blade chops      rosemary, garlic-studded,
head cheese Reuben, 158                      with spicy Korean vegetables,         mustard-crusted roasted
heart (grilled beef ), Peruvian-style        372–73                                shoulder of lamb with cherry
     you gotta have, 149–50               spicy, “Peking duck–style” roast         tomato-ginger conﬁt and,
herb(s)(ed):                                 pork loin with, 332–34                266–67
  aromatic, Southeast Asian-style       hollandaise, A-1, black pan-seared      rosemary-garlic, roast pork loin
     veal cakes with two dipping             tournedos with asparagus,             with apricot-sausage stufﬁng
     sauces and, 222–23                      crab and, 91–92                       and, 334–37



                                                                                                         INDEX      453
      jus (continued )                          recipes for large tough cuts of,      lamb loin chops:
         Smithﬁeld ham-raisin, honey-              268–77                               grilled double-thick, with
            and-bourbon-glazed roasted          recipes for odd cuts of,                   roasted peppers and onions
            loin of veal with crusty sweet         315–18                                  and creamy braised garlic-
            potatoes and, 170–71                recipes for small tender cuts of,          Parmesan vinaigrette,
         Yorkshire pudding with                    278–300                                 282–83
            boneless rib roast “prime           recipes for small tough cuts of,        grilled peppered, with green
            rib–style” au, 46–47                   301–14                                  grape-parsley relish, 280–81
                                                stock, 33                             lamb ribs, 244
      Kale and mushroom hobo pack,              tongues on toast with bacon             adobo with fresh pineapple­
            443                                    and tomatoes, 317–18                    chipotle glaze, Denver,
      kebabs:                                 lamb, crown roast of, 244                    298–99
         of grilled beef liver and slab         with saffron rice and apricot-          chops, broiled double-thick,
            bacon on cornmeal mush                 mint sauce, 248–50                      with slicked-up store-bought
            with smoky tomato-bacon           lamb, ground:                                mint jelly sauce, 284–85
            relish, 154–56                      -and-rice-stuffed squash with         lamb saddle, 244
         grilled Polynesian-style                  dates, mint, and pine nuts,          with peach-pomegranate sauce
            tenderloin tip, bacon,                 spicy, 313–14                           and garlic-roasted tomatoes,
            pineapple, and peppers,             in new school shepherd’s pie               very impressive, 262–64
            104–5                                  with sweet potato crust,           lamb shanks, 245
         piccata-style grilled veal, sweet         311–12                               Chianti-and-balsamic-braised,
            potato, and red onion, 214–15     lamb, leg of, 244, 245, 257                  over creamy Parmesan
         veal, 163                              crusty grilled butterﬂied, with            polenta with roasted
         see also lamb skewers; pork               smoky eggplant-ﬁg relish,               tomato–garlic relish, 270–72
            skewers                                254–56                               with lemons, tomatoes, and
      Kentucky-style barbecued lamb             grill-roasted bone-in, with                green olives, North African-
            shoulder, with chile-vinegar           grilled peaches and red                 style, 269–70
            sauce and sweet-and-sour               onion-cilantro salsa,              lamb shoulder, 244, 245
            slaw, 273–74                           258–59                               chops, Greek-style grilled, 287
      kidneys:                                  steaks on eggplant planks,              garlic-studded, mustard-crusted
         broiled lamb, with grainy                 grilled, with mint-yogurt               roasted, with cherry tomato-
            mustard sauce and watercress           sauce and cucumber-red                  ginger conﬁt and rosemary
            and tomato salad, 316–17               onion relish, 296–97                    jus, 266–67
         seared veal, with roasted pears        straight-up roasted whole, over         Kentucky-style barbecued, with
            and horseradish-mustard                potatoes and onions with                chile-vinegar sauce and
            sauce, 239–40                          lemon, garlic and oregano,              sweet-and-sour slaw, 273–74
      kimchee, quick, Korean-style                 252–53                               mango-braised, with sweet
            grilled short ribs with ginger,     strips with green beans,                   toasted spices and tomato-
            chiles and, 117–18                     eggplant, and peppers in                cucumber relish, 275–77
      K.L.-style gingered beef stew with           hoisin-ginger sauce, stir-fried,     onion, and potato casserole
            red onion-lime sambal,                 299–300                                 with red wine, layered,
            126–27                              top, grilled peppered, on                  309–11
      Korean:                                      arugula, fennel, and oranges         in stews, 302–9
         spicy vegetables, hoisin-glazed           with white bean-roasted red        lamb skewers:
            grilled pork blade chops with,         pepper relish, 260–61                with dried apricots and green
            372–73                            lamb, rack of, 244                           olive dressing, broiled
         -style grilled short ribs with         crusty, with raisin-parsley                sherried, 294–95
            ginger, chiles, and quick              vinaigrette, 251–52                  grilled peach, with cumin-raisin
            kimchee, 117–18                   lamb chops, shoulder, 3, 13                  vinaigrette, 293–94
                                              lamb loin, 244                            spice-rubbed grilled, with
      Lamb, 241–318                             couscous-stuffed, with smooth              peanut-herb power pack
        cuts of, 5–8, 243, 244–45                  apricot-lemon chutney,                  (Indobob), 291–92
        grades of, 9, 246                          264–66                             lamb stew, 245
        great, 10 steps to, 247, 268, 278,      medallions, sautéed, with red           aromatic, with peaches and
           279, 301                                wine-pomegranate sauce and              fresh mint, 306–7
        kidneys, broiled, with grainy              minted vegetables, 290–91            leek and white bean, with
           mustard sauce and watercress         parsley-coated grilled, with               oregano, walnuts, and hard
           and tomato salad, 316–17                smoky eggplant planks and               cheese, 305–6
        recipes for large tender cuts of,          tomato-ﬁg hobo pack,                 with okra and tomatoes,
           247–67                                  288–89                                  curried, 308–9




454   INDEX
   Persian-style with eggplant,            -ginger dressing, Southeast             -cucumber coolant, the world’s
      with tomatoes, raisins, and              Asian-style grilled skirt steak        hottest chili, with Scotch
      saffron, 302–3                           with aromatic greens and,              bonnet peppers, yucca and,
   straight-up, Irish, 303–4                   110–11                                 131–33
lamb tenderloins, 244                      -red onion sambal, K.L.-style           pork, and bacon skewers with
   grilled, on Greek salad with                gingered beef stew with,               guava-chile glaze, grilled,
      grilled pita, 285–86                     126–27                                 381–82
Laotian-style aromatic beef salad,         -soaked, cumin-crusted grilled          salsa, grill-roasted rum-brined
      102–3                                    skirt steak with green olive-          fresh ham with grilled
leek(s):                                       chile relish, 112–13                   pineapples and bananas and,
   braised, 430                            spicy yellow squash hobo pack              328–30
   lamb, and white bean stew with              with, 441                           -stewed pork with fried sweet
      oregano, walnuts, and hard           West Indies–style pork stew                potatoes, 392–93
      cheese, 305–6                            with plantains, chiles and,         -stuffed veal birdies with
   rump roast on a bed of red                  388–89                                 cognac-green peppercorn
      onions, new potatoes and,            zest, rice pilaf with pine nuts,           sauce, 210–11
      58–59                                    aromatic spices and, 417          maple-glazed fresh ham with hard
lemon(s)(y):                            liver, 7                                      cider–raisin sauce, 326–27
   -apricot chutney, smooth,               beef, and slab bacon kebab,           marmalade, lime-chipotle, Latin-
      couscous-stuffed lamb loin               grilled, on cornmeal mush              ﬂavored roasted beef chuck
      with, 264–66                             with smoky tomato-bacon                eye roast with fried plantains
   balsamic-braised pot roast with             relish, 154–56                         and, 56–57
      tomatoes, raisins, black olive-      seared calf ’s, with bacon,           marrow, 13, 40
      pine nut relish and, 66–68               onions, and sweet-and-sour          hobo packs on toast, 153
   -caper sauce, veal birdies                  Madeira sauce, 237–38             mashed potatoes, 413
      Tidewater-style, with             lo mein, scallion, with soy-braised        blue cheese, 413
      Smithﬁeld ham, backﬁn crab               bok choy, sautéed pork              horseradish, 413
      and, 208–9                               scallopini over, 368–69             roasted-garlic, 413
   greens, veal, sausage, and fava      “London broil–style” herb-crusted        meat, 1–30
      bean stew with, 230–31                   grilled top round steak with        aging of, 26–27
   North African-style braised                 maître d’hôtel butter and           grades of, 9, 41, 44, 46, 164, 246,
      lamb shanks with tomatoes,               smoky balsamic onions,                 324
      green olives and, 269–70                 106–7                               storage of, 28, 42, 164, 246,
   -pistachio power pack, tomato-       lychee-chile sambal, ginger-rubbed            324
      braised veal shanks with                 rack of pork with, 337–38         meat loaf:
      pumpkin risotto and, 182–84                                                  with brandy, walnuts, and spicy
   potato and eggplant hobo pack        Macadamia nut–crusted pork                    tomato sauce, basil-crusted,
      with, 441                             chops with pineapple-ginger               145–46
   rosemary-crusted roasted rack            catsup, 360–61                         veal, 163
      of veal with exotic               Madeira:                                   veal, a hot open-faced sandwich
      mushrooms, white wine and,         -blue cheese sauce, seared veal              with arugula, blue cheese-
      168–69                                tenderloins over watercress               tomato relish and, 224–25
   sautéed medallions of veal with          and walnuts with, 190–91             Mexico, Mexican-style dishes, 36,
      artichoke hearts, thyme and,       cumin-crusted roasted                        64, 79
      201–2                                 Châteaubriand with wild                grilled thin pork chops with
   seared balsamic-glazed top               mushrooms and, 48–49                      avocado-corn salsa,
      blade chuck steaks with            paillard of veal with pancetta,              374–75
      spinach, olive oil and, 108–9         white mushrooms and,                   hangover-style tripe stew,
   straight-up roasted whole leg of         203–4                                     151–52
      lamb over potatoes and             sweet-and-sour sauce, seared            mint(ed):
      onions with garlic, oregano           calf ’s liver with bacon, onions       -apricot sauce, crown roast of
      and, 252–53                           and, 237–38                               lamb with saffron rice and,
lentils, simple, 425                    Malaysian-inspired pork stew with             248–50
lima beans with bacon and thyme,            coconut milk and aromatic              fresh, aromatic lamb stew with
      431                                   garnishes, 396–97                         peaches and, 306–7
lime:                                   mango:                                     fresh peas, 428
   -chipotle marmalade, Latin-           -braised lamb shoulder with               grilled veal shoulder chops with
      ﬂavored roasted beef chuck            sweet toasted spices and                  nectarine-ginger chutney and
      eye roast with fried plantains        tomato-cucumber relish,                   cucumbers with yogurt and,
      and, 56–57                            275–77                                    198–99



                                                                                                              INDEX      455
      mint(ed) (continued)                 mustard:                              Cuban-style braised beef blade
        honey, spicy, fennel-crusted        -crusted, garlic-studded roasted        steak with raisins, fried sweet
           ﬂank steak with orange–black        shoulder of lamb with cherry         potatoes and, 63–64
           olive relish and, 114–15            tomato–ginger conﬁt and           dressing, broiled sherried lamb
        jelly sauce, slicked-up store-         rosemary jus, 266–67                 skewers with dried apricots
           bought, broiled double-thick     -horseradish sauce, seared veal         and, 294–95
           lamb rib chops with, 284–85         kidneys with roasted pears        North African–style braised
        spicy lamb-and-rice-stuffed            and, 239–40                          lamb shanks with lemons,
           squash with dates, pine nuts    mustard, grainy:                         tomatoes and, 269–70
           and, 313–14                      -horseradish sauce, barbecued        -red onion relish, grilled
        vegetables, sautéed lamb               whole beef brisket with              boneless pork loin chops with
           medallions with red wine-           pastrami-style rub and,              nectarine chutney and,
           pomegranate sauce and,              70–72                                370–71
           290–91                           sauce, broiled lamb kidneys          spicy pan-seared veal loin
        -yogurt sauce, grilled lamb leg        with watercress and tomato           medallions with anchovies
           steaks on eggplant planks           salad and, 316–17                    and, 205–6
           with cucumber-red onion          sauce, sweet, roast sage-garlic      and sun-dried tomato relish,
           relish and, 296–97                  pork butt with roasted               spicy, grilled veal loin chops
      molasses:                                pineapple and onions and,            with, 196–97
        -chile barbecue sauce, EZ-style        339–40                            veal steamship round with
           adobo pork ribs with, 348–49    mutton, 243                              oven-dried tomatoes and,
        -glazed pork tenderloin with                                                174–76
           seared sweet-and-sour red       Nectarine:                          onion(s):
           onions and sage-date power        chutney, grilled boneless pork      lamb, and potato casserole with
           pack, 376–77                         loin chops with green               red wine, layered, 309–11
      Mr. Perfect steak for two, 89–90          olive–red onion relish and,      pearl, new potato hobo pack
      mushroom(s):                              370–71                              with spinach and, 442
        broiled bacon-wrapped ﬁlet           -ginger chutney, grilled veal       peppers, and tomatoes and
           mignon with roasted endive           shoulder chops with                 crunchy parsley–bread crumb
           and blue cheese butter and,          cucumbers with mint and             shake, old-style chunky beef
           88–89                                yogurt and, 198–99                  and beer stew with,
        exotic, broiled veal loin chop     New York strip steak, 4, 5, 39           122–23
           with bacon, sherry and,         “nick, peek, and cheat” method,       rings, batter-fried, 437
           194–95                               15, 23                         onion(s), red:
        exotic, rosemary-crusted           No Roll beef, 41                      braised with pepper-crusted
           roasted rack of veal with       North Carolina, eastern authentic        veal riblets over mushroom
           white wine, lemon and,               barbecued pork butt on buns         risotto, 220–21
           168–69                               with Tidewater slaw, 350–51      -cilantro salsa, grill-roasted
        green beans with almonds and,      nuts, see speciﬁc nuts                   bone-in leg of lamb with
           429                                                                      grilled peaches and, 258–59
        hobo packs, pepper-crusted         Okra:                                 cucumber relish, grilled lamb
           grilled strip loin steak with      crispy fried, 429                     leg steaks on eggplant planks
           homemade steak sauce and,          curried lamb stew with                with mint-yogurt sauce and,
           96–98                                 tomatoes and, 308–9                296–97
        and kale hobo pack, 443               jalapeño-Cheddar grits under       –green olive relish, grilled
        portobello relish, smoky, simple         spicy pork stew with               boneless pork loin chops with
           grilled veal rib chops with,          tomatoes and, 390–91               nectarine chutney and,
           197–98                          olive(s), black:                         370–71
        risotto, pepper-crusted veal          -orange relish, fennel-crusted     grilled double-thick lamb loin
           riblets braised with red              ﬂank steak with spicy mint         chops and creamy braised
           onions over, 220–21                   honey and, 114–15                  garlic-Parmesan vinaigrette
        steak bomb—fully loaded with          –pine nut relish, balsamic-           and roasted peppers and,
           onions, peppers and, 135–36           braised pot roast with             282–83
        white, paillard of veal with             tomatoes, lemons, raisins       grilled pork tenderloin on a
           pancetta, Madeira and, 203–4          and, 66–68                         salad of grilled potatoes and,
        white veal stew with corn,            roasted potatoes with, 414            378–79
           sherry and, 225–26              olive(s), green:                      Indian-spiced beef-stuffed, with
        wild, cumin-crusted roasted           -chile relish, lime-soaked,           fresh coconut-ginger chutney
           Châteaubriand with Madeira            cumin-crusted grilled skirt        and simple yogurt sauce,
           and, 48–49                            steak with, 112–13                 140–41




456   INDEX
  lime sambal, K.L.-style gingered       -stewed country-style pork ribs      parsley(ed):
     beef stew with, 126–27                 with sweet-and-sour red             A-1 butter, Texas-style ground
  piccata-style kebabs of grilled           cabbage slaw, 387–88                   beef casserole with sweet
     veal, sweet potato and,           oregano:                                    potato crust and, 138–39
     214–15                              lamb, leek, and white bean stew        –bread crumb shake, old-style
  red wine-caramelized, corned              with walnuts, hard cheese              chunky beef and beer stew
     beef and sweet potato hash             and, 305–6                             with onions, peppers, and
     with, 148–49                        orange-and-chile-stewed                   tomatoes and, 122–23
  roast sage-garlic pork butt with          bottom round steaks with            -caper sauce, garlic-studded
     sweet mustard sauce and                butternut squash and, 120–21           roast eye of round with sweet
     roasted pineapple and,              orange-braised short ribs with            potatoes and, 54–55
     339–40                                 fennel seeds and, 76–77             -coated grilled lamb loin with
  rump roast on a bed of leeks,          -sour orange dressing, grilled            smoky eggplant planks and
     new potatoes and, 58–59                pork loin ﬁllets on Latin-style        tomato-ﬁg hobo packs, 288–89
  seared calf ’s liver with bacon,          salad with, 366–67                  EZ-style sherry-braised veal
     sweet-and-sour Madeira              straight-up roasted whole leg of          shank with raisins and,
     sauce and, 237–38                      lamb over potatoes and                 184–85
  seared sweet-and-sour,                    onions with lemon, garlic           –green grape relish, grilled
     molasses-glazed pork                   and, 252–53                            peppered lamb loin chops
     tenderloin with sage-date         organ meats, see heart; kidneys;            with, 280–81
     power pack and, 376–77                 liver; sweetbreads; tripe stew      new potatoes, 412
  smoky balsamic, herb-crusted         osso buco, 13, 162                       -raisin vinaigrette, crusty rack of
     grilled top round steak             tomato-braised veal shanks with           lamb with, 251–52
     “London broil-style” with              pumpkin risotto and lemon-          -sherry sauce, pan-seared
     maître d’hôtel butter and,             pistachio power pack,                  Delmonico with roasted ﬁgs
     106–7                                  182–84                                 and, 86–87
  steak bomb—fully loaded with         oxtail(s), 13, 40                      peach(es):
     mushrooms, peppers and,             braised in red wine over               aromatic lamb stew with fresh
     135–36                                 spaghetti with garlic and              mint and, 306–7
  straight-up roasted whole leg of          spinach, 143–44                     chutney, grilled coriander-
     lamb with lemon, garlic, and                                                  crusted, pickled corn-stuffed
     oregano over potatoes and,        Pancetta, paillard of veal with             double-thick pork chops
     252–53                                 white mushrooms, Madeira               with, 356–57
orange(s):                                  and, 203–4                          grilled, grill-roasted bone-in leg
  arugula, and fennel under            panfried brined loin chops stuffed          of lamb with red onion-
     grilled peppered lamb leg top          with walnuts and Stilton               cilantro salsa and, 258–59
     with white bean-roasted red            cheese, with spiced apples,         and lamb skewers, grilled, with
     pepper relish, 260–61                  358–60                                 cumin-raisin vinaigrette,
  –black olive relish, fennel-         pan-seared:                                 293–94
     crusted ﬂank steak with spicy       Delmonico with roasted ﬁgs             -pomegranate sauce, very
     mint honey and, 114–15                 and sherry-parsley sauce,              impressive roasted lamb
  -braised short ribs with fennel           86–87                                  saddle with garlic-roasted
     seeds and oregano,                  thin strip loin steak in the style        tomatoes and, 262–64
     76–77                                  of Diane, 94–95                     red wine–braised pork steaks
  -braised veal shoulder with            tournedos with asparagus, crab,           with cinnamon, couscous
     sweet-and-sour braised                 and A-1 hollandaise, black,            and, 344–45
     cabbage and fennel slaw,               91–92                             peanut(s):
     186–87                              veal loin medallions with              ginger, scallions, and sirloin tips
  brandied, rack of veal with               anchovies and green olives,            stir-fried, over smoky sesame
     chestnut stufﬁng, light basil          spicy, 205–6                           cabbage, 101–2
     jus and, 166–68                   Parmesan:                                -ginger power pack, white
  -and-chile-stewed bottom round         -garlic vinaigrette, creamy               pepper–crusted pork loin
     steaks with butternut squash           braised, grilled double-thick          chops with, 363–64
     and oregano, 120–21                    lamb loin chops with roasted        -herb power pack, spice-rubbed
  sour, -chipotle barbecue sauce,           peppers and onions,                    grilled lamb skewers with
     Latin-style barbecued veal             282–83                                 (Indobob), 291–92
     breast with, 178–79                 polenta, creamy, under Chianti-      pears:
  sour, -oregano dressing, grilled          and-balsamic-braised lamb           fragrant winter pork stew with
     pork loin ﬁllets on Latin-style        shanks with roasted tomato-            fennel, sauerkraut and,
     salad with, 366–67                     garlic relish, 270–72                  394–95



                                                                                                          INDEX       457
      pears (continued)                      peppers, Scotch bonnet, yucca and         Latin-ﬂavored roasted beef
        roasted, seared veal kidneys               a cucumber-mango coolant,              chuck eye roast with lime­
            with horseradish-mustard               the world’s hottest chili with,        chipotle marmalade and,
            sauce and, 239–40                      131–33                                 56–57
      peas:                                  peppers, simple brown veal stew         polenta:
        black-eyed, in hoppin’ John,               with tomatoes, capers and,          creamy Parmesan, under
            421                                    227–28                                 Chianti-and-balsamic-braised
        Indian-spiced green split,           Persian:                                     lamb shanks with roasted
            smoked ham hocks with,              rice, 418                                 tomato-garlic relish,
            404–6                               -style lamb and eggplant stew             270–72
        minted fresh, 428                          with tomatoes, raisins, and         veal stir-fry on big fried
      “Peking duck–style” roast pork               saffron, 302–3                         croutons of, 212–13
            loin with spicy hoisin sauce,    Peruvian-style you gotta have           Polynesian:
            332–34                                 (grilled beef ) heart, 149–50       grilled pork, bacon, and mango
      pepper, white:                         pigs, 319–23                                 skewers with guava-chile
        –crusted black-and-blue steak           see also pork                             glaze, 381–82
            stuffed with spicy sesame        pineapple(s):                             -style tenderloin tip kebabs with
            spinach with soy-wasabi             -chipotle glaze, fresh, Denver            bacon, pineapple, and
            dipping sauce, 93–94                   lamb ribs adobo with, 298–99           peppers, grilled, 104–5
        –crusted pork loin chops with           -ginger catsup, macadamia            pomegranate:
            peanut-ginger power pack,              nut–crusted pork chops with,        -peach sauce, very impressive
            363–64                                 360–61                                 roasted lamb saddle with
      peppercorn, green, -cognac sauce,         grilled Polynesian-style                  garlic-roasted tomatoes and,
            mango-stuffed veal birdies             tenderloin tip kebabs with             262–64
            with, 210–11                           bacon, peppers and, 104–5           -red wine sauce, sautéed lamb
      pepper(ed), black:                        grill-roasted rum-brined fresh            medallions with minted
        –crusted grilled strip loin steak          ham with mango salsa and               vegetables and, 290–91
            with homemade steak sauce              grilled bananas and, 328–30       pork, 319–406
            and mushrooms hobo packs,           roast sage–garlic pork butt with       blade chops, hoisin-glazed
            96–98                                  sweet mustard sauce and                grilled, with spicy Korean
        –crusted veal riblets braised              roasted onions and, 339–40             vegetables, 372–73
            with red onions over                -watermelon salad, BBQ-rubbed          Buffalo-style grilled baby back
            mushroom risotto, 220–21               grilled fresh ham center slice         ribs, 380
        –crusted wine-braised short ribs           with, 384–85                        cuts of, 5–8, 322–24
            with garlic and turnips, 74–75   pine nut(s):                              grades of, 9, 324
        grilled lamb loin chops with            –black olive relish, balsamic-         great, 10 steps to, 325, 341, 354,
            green grape–parsley relish,            braised pot roast with                 355, 386
            280–81                                 tomatoes, lemons, raisins           recipes for large tender cuts of,
        lamb leg top, grilled, on                  and, 66–68                             325–40
            arugula, fennel, and oranges        rice pilaf with lime zest,             recipes for large tough cuts of,
            with white bean–roasted red            aromatic spices and, 417               341–53
            pepper relish, 260–61               spicy lamb-and-rice-stuffed            recipes for odd cuts of, 402–6
      peppers, red bell:                           squash with dates, mint and,        recipes for small tender cuts of,
        green beans, and eggplant with             313–14                                 354–85
            lamb in hoisin-ginger sauce,     pistachio-lemon power pack,               recipes for small tough cuts of,
            stir-fried, 299–300                    tomato-braised veal shanks             386–401
        grilled double-thick lamb loin             with pumpkin risotto and,           stock, 33
            chops with creamy braised              182–84                              see also bacon; Boston butt;
            garlic–Parmesan vinaigrette,     pita, grilled, grilled lamb                  ham, fresh; ham, Smithﬁeld;
            onions and roasted, 282–83             tenderloins on Greek salad             ham hocks
        grilled Polynesian-style                   with, 285–86                      pork butt (roast), 3
            tenderloin tip kebabs with       plantains:                                on buns, authentic eastern
            bacon, pineapple and, 104–5         Señor Sanchez’s Salvadoran                North Carolina, with
        onions, and tomatoes, old-style            soup of kings with short ribs,         Tidewater slaw, 350–51
            chunky beef and beer stew              corn and, 133–34                    cheater-style indoor barbecued,
            with crunchy parsley–bread          West Indies–style pork stew               352–53
            crumb shake and, 122–23                with lime, chiles and, 388–89       sage-garlic, with roasted
        steak bomb—fully loaded with         plantains, fried:                            pineapple and onions and
            mushrooms, onions and,              beef and black bean stew with             sweet mustard sauce,
            135–36                                 Brazilian ﬂavors and, 124–25           339–40




458   INDEX
pork loin, 322                           traditional dry-rubbed St.              pot likker–braised fresh ham
  cumin-crusted grilled boneless,           Louis–style, 346–47                     hocks with collard greens
     with grilled avocados and         pork stew (stewed pork), 323                 and, 403–4
     apple-chipotle salsa, 331–32        with coconut milk and aromatic          roasted, 414
  ﬁllets, grilled, on Latin-style           garnishes, Malaysian-                roasted, with black olives, 414
     salad with sour orange–                inspired, 396–97                     roesti, 410
     oregano dressing, 366–67            with eggplant, chiles and               straight-up roasted whole leg of
  roast, with apricot-sausage               sesame spinach, spicy, 398–99           lamb with lemon, garlic, and
     stufﬁng and rosemary-garlic         with fennel, pears, and                    oregano over onions and,
     jus, 334–37                            sauerkraut, fragrant winter,            252–53
  roast, with spicy hoisin sauce,           394–95                               straw, 411
     “Peking duck–style,” 332–34         with mango and fried sweet           potato(es), new:
pork (loin) chops, 324, 362                 potatoes, 392–93                     hobo pack with pearl onions
  cutlets, sautéed, with cashew          with plantains, lime, and chiles,          and spinach, 442
     slaw and chile ﬂavor booster,          West Indies–style, 388–89            parsleyed, 412
     364–65                              ribs, country-style orange, with        rump roast on a bed of red
  grilled boneless, with green              sweet-and-sour red cabbage              onions, leeks and, 58–59
     olive–red onion relish and             slaw, 387–88                      pot likker–braised fresh ham hocks
     nectarine chutney, 370–71           with tomatoes and okra, spicy,             with collard greens and
  grilled coriander-crusted,                over jalapeño-Cheddar grits,            potatoes, 403–4
     pickled corn-stuffed double-           390–91                            pot roast, 38
     thick, with peach chutney,        pork tenderloin, 322–23                   balsamic-braised, with
     356–57                              grilled, on a salad of grilled             tomatoes, lemons, raisins,
  grilled thin, with avocado-corn           potatoes and red onions,                and black olive-pine nut
     salsa, 374–75                          378–79                                  relish, 66–68
  macadamia nut-crusted, with            molasses-glazed, with seared            with caraway and green apples,
     pineapple-ginger catsup,               sweet-and-sour red onions               lazy Sunday, 69–70
     360–61                                 and sage-date power pack,            old-school Yankee, with root
  panfried brined, stuffed with             376–77                                  vegetables and fresh tomato-
     walnuts and Stilton cheese,       port, hazelnut-crusted veal                  fennel relish, 65–66
     with spiced apples, 358–60             tenderloin with roasted           power packs:
  scallopini, sautéed, over scallion        grapes and, 192–93                   lemon-pistachio, tomato-braised
     lo mein with soy-braised bok      porterhouse steak, 5, 13, 38, 39, 40         veal shanks with pumpkin
     choy, 368–69                        for two, Mr. Perfect, 89–90                risotto and, 182–84
  white pepper–crusted, with           potato(es):                               peanut-ginger, white pepper-
     peanut-ginger power pack,           Anna, 409                                  crusted pork loin chops with,
     363–64                              au gratin (gratin Dauphinois),             363–64
pork picnic shoulder, 4, 322, 323           410–11                               peanut-herb, spice-rubbed
  in soy-braised, hoisin-glazed          bacon-cheese stuffed, 415                  grilled lamb skewers with
     roast with sesame-ginger            baked stuffed, 415                         (Indobob), 291–92
     dipping sauce, 342–43               chips, 411                              sage-date, molasses-glazed pork
pork rib roast (rack of pork), 323       dumplings, herbed, old-                    tenderloin with seared sweet-
  ginger-rubbed, with chile-lychee          fashioned braised beef with             and-sour red onions and,
     sambal, 337–38                         horseradish sauce and, 61–63            376–77
pork shoulder, 322                       and eggplant hobo pack with          Prime meat, 9, 41, 246
  blade roast, 323                          lemon, 441                        prime rib, see rib roast
  blade steaks, red wine-braised,        French fries, 411                    prosciutto, grilled veal T-bones
     with peaches, cinnamon, and         -garlic hobo pack, sour cream,             with a hobo pack of ﬁg,
     couscous, 344–45                       and bacon bits, grill-roasted           spinach and, 200–201
  in gingered curry with seven              rib roast (prime rib) with,       Puerto Rican vinegar-braised ﬂank
     garnishes, 400–401                     44–45                                   steak with cabbage, corn and
pork skewers:                            grilled, and red onions salad,             yucca salad, 77–79
  guava-chile glazed grilled                grilled pork tenderloin on a,     pumpkin risotto, tomato-braised veal
     bacon, mango and, 381–82               378–79                                  shanks with lemon-pistachio
  sun-dried tomato-basil relish          hash browns, 412                           power pack and, 182–84
     with grilled ﬁg and, 382–83         lamb, and onion casserole with
pork spareribs, 319, 323                    red wine, layered, 309–11         Raisin(s):
  EZ-style adobo, with molasses-         Macaire, 414                           balsamic, grilled veal ﬂank steak
     chile barbecue sauce,               mashed, 413                              on Texas toast with yellow
     348–49                              O’Brien, 412                             tomato chutney and, 216–17



                                                                                                         INDEX       459
      raisin(s) (continued )                    smoky portobello, simple            carrots, 435
         balsamic-braised pot roast with           grilled veal rib chops with,     couscous-stuffed lamb loin with
            tomatoes, lemons, black                197–98                              smooth apricot-lemon
            olive–pine nut relish and,          smoky tomato-bacon, grilled            chutney, 264–66
            66–68                                  beef liver and slab bacon        crown roast of lamb with
         Cuban-style braised beef blade            kebab on cornmeal mush              saffron rice and apricot-mint
            steak with olives, fried sweet         with, 154–46                        sauce, 248–50
            potatoes and, 63–64                 spicy green olive and sun-dried     crusty rack of lamb with raisin­
         -cumin vinaigrette, grilled lamb          tomato, grilled veal loin           parsley vinaigrette, 251–52
            and peach skewers with,                chops with, 196–97               cumin-crusted Châteaubriand
            293–94                              sun-dried tomato-basil, grilled        with wild mushrooms and
         EZ-style sherry-braised veal              pork and ﬁg skewers with,           Madeira, 48–49
            shank with parsley and,                382–83                           ﬁgs, pan-seared Delmonico with
            184–85                              tomato-cucumber, mango-                sherry-parsley sauce and,
         -hard cider sauce, maple-glazed           braised lamb shoulder with          86–87
            fresh ham with, 326–27                 sweet toasted spices and,        garlic, ash-, 444
         -parsley vinaigrette, crusty rack         275–77                           -garlic mashed potatoes,
            of lamb with, 251–52                white bean–roasted red pepper,         413
         Persian-style lamb and eggplant           grilled peppered lamb leg top    garlic-studded, mustard-crusted
            stew with tomatoes, saffron            on arugula, fennel, and             shoulder of lamb with cherry
            and, 302–3                             oranges with, 260–61                tomato-ginger conﬁt and
         -Smithﬁeld ham jus, honey-and­         see also sambal                        rosemary jus, 266–67
            bourbon-glazed roasted loin      rib roast (prime rib), 38              garlic-studded eye of round
            of veal with crusty sweet           boneless, “prime rib-style” au         with sweet potatoes and
            potatoes and, 170–71                   jus with Yorkshire pudding,         South American parsley­
         -sweet potato hobo pack, 441              46–47                               caper sauce, 54–55
      red cabbage, see cabbage, red             grill-roasted, with potato-garlic   ginger-rubbed rack of pork
      relish:                                      hobo pack, sour cream, and          with chile-lychee sambal,
         black olive–pine nut, balsamic-           bacon bits, 44–45                   337–38
            braised pot roast with           rice:                                  grapes, hazelnut-crusted veal
            tomatoes, lemons, raisins           basic fried, 420                       tenderloin with port and,
            and, 66–68                          coconut, 418–19                        192–93
         blue cheese–tomato, a hot              in hoppin’ John, 421                great, 10 steps to, 43, 165, 247,
            open-faced veal meat loaf           -and-lamb-stuffed squash with          325
            sandwich with arugula and,             dates, mint, and pine nuts,      honey-and-bourbon glazed loin
            224–25                                 spicy, 313–14                       of veal with crusty sweet
         cucumber-red onion, grilled            Latin-style black beans and, 422       potatoes and Smithﬁeld ham-
            lamb leg steaks on eggplant         Persian, 418                           raisin jus, 170–71
            planks with mint-yogurt             saffron, crown roast of lamb        lamb saddle with peach-
            sauce and, 296–97                      with apricot-mint sauce and,        pomegranate sauce and
         fresh tomato-fennel, old-school           248–50                              garlic-roasted tomatoes, very
            Yankee pot roast with root          Spanish, 419                           impressive, 262–64
            vegetables and, 65–66               see also risotto                    Latin-ﬂavored beef chuck eye
         green grape–parsley, grilled        rice pilaf:                               roast with lime-chipotle
            peppered lamb loin chops            with almonds and currants, 417         marmalade and fried
            with, 280–81                        with lime zest, pine nuts, and         plantains, 56–57
         green olive–chile, lime-soaked,           aromatic spices, 417             maple-glazed fresh ham with
            cumin-crusted grilled skirt         simple, 417                            hard cider-raisin sauce,
            steak with, 112–13               risotto:                                  326–27
         green olive–red onion, grilled         mushroom, pepper-crusted veal       pears, seared veal kidneys with
            boneless pork loin chops with          riblets braised with red            horseradish-mustard sauce
            nectarine chutney and,                 onions over, 220–21                 and, 239–40
            370–71                              pumpkin, tomato-braised veal        peppers, grilled double-thick
         orange–black olive, fennel-               shanks with lemon-pistachio         lamb loin chops with creamy
            crusted ﬂank steak with                power pack and, 182–84              braised garlic-Parmesan
            spicy mint honey and,            roast(ed), roasting, 16–19                vinaigrette and onions and,
            114–15                              asparagus, 427                         282–83
         smoky eggplant-ﬁg, crusty              boneless rib roast “prime rib-      pork loin with apricot-sausage
            grilled butterﬂied leg of lamb         style” au jus with Yorkshire        stufﬁng and rosemary-garlic
            with, 254–56                           pudding, 46–47                      jus, 334–37




460   INDEX
  pork loin with spicy hoisin
     sauce, “Peking duck-style,”      Saffron:                               Salvadoran soup of kings with
                                                                                  short ribs, corn, and
     332–34                              Persian-style lamb and eggplant          plantains, Señor Sanchez’s,
  potatoes, 414                             stew with tomatoes, raisins           133–34
  potatoes with black olives,               and, 302–3                       sambal:
     414                                 rice, crown roast of lamb with        chile-lychee, ginger-rubbed rack
  rack of veal with chestnut                apricot-mint sauce and, 248–50        of pork with, 337–38
     stufﬁng, brandied oranges,       sage:                                    red onion-lime, K.L.-style
     and light basil jus, 166–68         -date power pack, molasses-              gingered beef stew with,
  red pepper–white bean relish,             glazed pork tenderloin with           126–27
     grilled peppered lamb leg top          seared sweet-and-sour red        sandwiches:
     on arugula, fennel, and                onions and, 376–77                 authentic eastern North
     oranges with, 260–61                -garlic pork butt roast with             Carolina barbecued pork butt
  rosemary-crusted rack of veal             roasted pineapple and onions          on buns with Tidewater slaw,
     with exotic mushrooms,                 and sweet mustard sauce,              350–51
     white wine, and lemon,                 339–40                             head cheese Reuben, 158
     168–69                              -rubbed roasted loin of beef          a hot open-faced veal meat
  rump, on a bed of red onions,             with shallot-bourbon sauce,           loaf, arugula and blue
     leeks, and new potatoes,               50–51                                 cheese-tomato relish, 224–25
     58–59                            St. Louis–style traditional dry-         steak bomb—fully loaded with
  sage-garlic pork butt with                rubbed pork spareribs,                mushrooms, onions, and
     roasted pineapple and onions           346–47                                peppers, 135–36
     and sweet mustard sauce,         salads:                                sauces:
     339–40                              cabbage, corn, and yucca,             apricot-mint, crown roast of
  sage-rubbed loin of beef with             Puerto Rican vinegar-braised          lamb with saffron rice and,
     shallot-bourbon sauce,                 ﬂank steak with, 77–79                248–50
     50–51                               Greek, grilled lamb tenderloins       blue cheese–Madeira, seared
  simple veal rump, with Stilton-           with grilled pita on, 285–86          veal tenderloins over
     stuffed apples, 172–73              Greek sliced grilled skirt steak         watercress and walnuts with,
  techniques for, 18–19                     on, 113–14                            190–91
  testing for doneness of, 15, 19        of grilled potatoes and red           chile-vinegar, barbecued lamb
  veal steamship round with                 onions, grilled pork                  shoulder Kentucky-style,
     green olives and oven-dried            tenderloin on, 378–79                 with sweet-and-sour slaw
     tomatoes, 174–76                    Laotian-style aromatic beef,             and, 273–74
  whole leg of lamb over potatoes           102–3                              cognac-green peppercorn,
     and onions with lemon,              Latin-style, with sour orange-           mango-stuffed veal birdies
     garlic, and oregano, straight-         oregano dressing, grilled pork        with, 210–11
     up, 252–53                             loin ﬁllets on, 366–67             grainy mustard, broiled lamb
  winter squash, 435                     Mediterranean white bean, 424            kidneys with watercress and
  see also grill-roasted; tomatoes,      watercress and tomato, broiled           tomato salad and, 316–17
     roasted                                lamb kidneys with grainy           grainy mustard–horseradish,
roasting pans, 29                           mustard sauce and,                    barbecued whole beef brisket
roasting rack, 29                           316–17                                with pastrami-style rub and,
roesti potatoes, 410                     watermelon-pineapple, BBQ-               70–72
rosemary:                                   rubbed grilled fresh ham           hard cider–raisin, maple-glazed
  -crusted roasted rack of veal             center slice with, 384–85             fresh ham with, 326–27
     with exotic mushrooms,           salsa:                                   homemade steak, pepper-
     white wine, and lemon,              apple-chipotle, cumin-crusted            crusted grilled strip loin steak
     168–69                                 grilled boneless pork loin            with mushroom hobo packs
  -garlic jus, roast pork loin with         with grilled avocados and,            and, 96–98
     apricot-sausage stufﬁng and,           331–32                              horseradish, old-fashioned
     334–37                              avocado-corn, grilled thin pork          braised beef with herbed
  jus, garlic-studded, mustard-             chops with, 374–75                    potato dumplings and,
     crusted roasted shoulder of         mango, grill-roasted rum-brined          61–62
     lamb with cherry tomato–               fresh ham with grilled             horseradish-mustard, seared
     ginger conﬁt and, 266–67               pineapples and bananas and,           veal kidneys with roasted
rum-brined fresh ham, grill-                328–30                                pears and, 239–40
     roasted, with mango salsa           red onion–cilantro, grill-roasted     hot, sweet and sour bone,
     and grilled pineapples and             bone-in leg of lamb with              Flintstones-style BBQ beef
     bananas, 328–30                        grilled peaches and, 258–59           ribs, 80–81



                                                                                                         INDEX       461
      sauces (continued )                       sweet mustard, roast sage–garlic       spinach with garlic, quick-, 427
        lemon-caper, veal birdies                  pork butt with roasted              techniques for, 23–24
           Tidewater-style, with                   pineapple and onions and,           veal birdies Tidewater-style,
           Smithﬁeld ham, backﬁn crab              339–40                                 with Smithﬁeld ham, backﬁn
           and, 208–9                           two dipping, Southeast Asian-             crab, and lemon-caper sauce,
        Madeira, cumin-crusted roasted             style veal cakes with aromatic         208–9
           Châteaubriand with wild                 herbs and, 222–23                   white pepper-crusted pork loin
           mushrooms and, 48–49                 see also A-1 (sauce); hoisin              chops with peanut-ginger
        mint-yogurt, grilled lamb leg              (sauce); jus                           power pack, 363–64
           steaks on eggplant planks          sauerkraut:                           sauté pans, 30
           with cucumber-red onion              braised beef brisket with, 72–73    scallion(s):
           relish and, 296–97                   fragrant winter pork stew with         carrot-ginger hobo pack with,
        molasses-chile barbecue, EZ-               fennel, pears and, 394–95              442
           style adobo pork ribs with,          in head cheese Reuben, 158             ginger, peanuts, and sirloin tips
           348–49                             sausage(s), 320                             stir-fried, over smoky sesame
        peach-pomegranate, very                 -apricot stufﬁng, roast pork loin         cabbage, 101–2
           impressive roasted lamb                 with rosemary-garlic jus and,       lo mein, sautéed pork scallopini
           saddle with garlic-roasted              334–37                                 with soy-braised bok choy
           tomatoes and, 262–64                 head cheese Reuben, 158                   over, 368–69
        red wine–braised oxtails, over          veal, and fava bean stew with       Scotch bonnet peppers, see
           spaghetti with garlic and               lemon greens, 230–31                   peppers, Scotch bonnet
           spinach, 143–44                    sautéing, sautéed, 21–24              scrambled eggs on toast with calf ’s
        red wine–pomegranate, sautéed           beef salad, Laotian-style                 brains and trufﬂe oil, 233–34
           lamb medallions with minted             aromatic, 102–3                  searing, seared, 26
           vegetables and, 290–91               black pan-seared tournedos             balsamic-glazed top blade chuck
        sesame-ginger dipping, soy-                with asparagus, crab, and A-1          steaks with spinach, lemon,
           braised, hoisin-glazed pork             hollandaise, 91–92                     and olive oil, 108–9
           shoulder roast with, 342–43          broccoli with garlic and oil, 430      calf ’s liver with bacon, onions,
        shallot-bourbon, sage-rubbed            great, 10 steps to, 85, 189, 279,         and sweet-and-sour Madeira
           roasted loin of beef with,              355                                    sauce, 237–38
           50–51                                lamb medallions with red               sweet-and-sour red onions,
        sherry-parsley, pan-seared                 wine-pomegranate sauce                 molasses-glazed pork
           Delmonico with roasted ﬁgs              and minted vegetables,                 tenderloin with sage-date
           and, 86–87                              290–91                                 power pack and, 376–77
        simple yogurt, Indian-spiced            macadamia nut–crusted pork             veal kidneys with roasted pears
           beef-stuffed red onions with            chops with pineapple-ginger            and horseradish-mustard
           fresh coconut-ginger chutney            catsup, 360–61                         sauce, 239–40
           and, 140–42                          mango stuffed veal birdies with        veal tenderloins over watercress
        slicked-up store-bought mint               cognac–green peppercorn                and walnuts with blue
           jelly, broiled double-thick             sauce, 210–11                          cheese-Madeira sauce, 190–91
           lamb rib chops with,                 medallions of veal with                see also pan-seared
           284–85                                  artichoke hearts, lemon, and     sesame:
        sour orange–chipotle barbecue,             thyme, 201–2                        cabbage, smoky, stir-fried sirloin
           Latin-style barbecued veal           paillard of veal with pancetta,           tips with ginger, peanuts, and
           breast with, 178–79                     white mushrooms and                    scallions over, 101–2
        South American parsley-caper,              Madeira, 203–4                      -ginger dipping sauce, soy-
           garlic-studded roast eye of          pan-seared Delmonico with                 braised, hoisin-glazed pork
           round with sweet potatoes               roasted ﬁgs and sherry-                shoulder roast with, 342–43
           and, 54–55                              parsley sauce, 86–87                spinach, spicy, stuffed white
        soy-wasabi dipping, white               pan-seared thin strip loin steak          pepper–crusted black-and­
           pepper–crusted black-and­               in the style of Diane, 94–95           blue steak with soy-wasabi
           blue steak stuffed with spicy        pork cutlets with cashew slaw             dipping sauce, 93–94
           sesame spinach with,                    and chile ﬂavor booster,            spinach, spicy stewed pork with
           93–94                                   364–65                                 eggplant, chiles and, 398–99
        spicy tomato, basil-crusted meat        pork scallopini over scallion lo    severe tongue hashing with
           loaf with brandy, walnuts               mein with soy-braised bok              turnips and Swiss chard,
           and, 145–46                             choy, 368–69                           156–57
        sweet-and-sour Madeira, seared          spicy pan-seared veal loin          shallot-bourbon sauce, sage-
           calf ’s liver with bacon, onions        medallions with anchovies              rubbed roasted loin of beef
           and, 237–38                             and green olives, 205–6                with, 50–51




462   INDEX
shepherd’s pie:                            sweet-and-sour, barbecued lamb           hoisin sauce, “Peking duck-
   from leftovers, 127, 176, 259,             shoulder Kentucky-style,                 style” roast pork loin with,
      274                                     with chile-vinegar sauce and,            332–34
   with sweet potato crust, new               273–74                                Korean vegetables, hoisin­
      school, 311–12                       sweet-and-sour braised cabbage              glazed grilled pork blade
sherry(ied):                                  and fennel, orange-braised               chops with, 372–73
   -braised veal shank with raisins           veal shoulder with,                   lamb-and-rice-stuffed squash
      and parsley, 184–85                     186–87                                   with dates, mint, and pine
   broiled veal loin chop with             sweet-and-sour red cabbage,                 nuts, 313–14
      exotic mushrooms, bacon                 orange-stewed country-style           Latin black beans, 423
      and, 194–95                             pork ribs with, 387–88                mint honey, fennel-crusted ﬂank
   lamb skewers with dried                 Tidewater, authentic eastern                steak with orange–black olive
      apricots and green olive                North Carolina barbecued                 relish and, 114–15
      dressing, broiled, 294–95               pork butt on buns with,               pan-seared veal loin medallions
   -parsley sauce, pan-seared                 350–51                                   with anchovies and green
      Delmonico with roasted ﬁgs        Smithﬁeld ham, see ham,                        olives, 205–6
      and, 86–87                              Smithﬁeld                             pork stew with tomatoes and
   white veal stew with                 soup of kings with short ribs,                 okra over jalapeño-Cheddar
      mushrooms, corn and,                    corn, and plantains, Señor               grits, 390–91
      225–26                                  Sanchez’s Salvadoran, 133–34          sesame spinach stuffed white
side dishes, bean:                      sour cream:                                    pepper–crusted black-and­
   salad, Mediterranean white,             grill-roasted rib roast (prime rib)         blue steak with soy-wasabi
      424                                     with potato-garlic hobo pack,            dipping sauce, 93–94
   simple lentils, 425                        bacon bits and, 44–45                 stewed pork with eggplant,
   spicy Latin black, 423                  hominy with Cheddar, chiles                 chiles, and sesame spinach,
side dishes, classic, 407–15                  and, 438                                 398–99
   au gratin potatoes (gratin           soy:                                        tomato sauce, basil-crusted
      Dauphinois), 410–11                  -braised, hoisin-glazed pork                meat loaf with brandy,
   baked stuffed potatoes, 415                shoulder roast with sesame-              walnuts and, 145–46
   French fries, 411                          ginger dipping sauce, 342–43          yellow squash hobo pack with
   hash browns, 412                        -braised bok choy, sautéed pork             lime, 441
   mashed potatoes, 413                       scallopini over scallion lo        spinach:
   parsleyed new potatoes, 412                mein with, 368–69                     butternut squash hobo pack
   potatoes Anna, 409                      -wasabi dipping sauce, white                with apricots and, 442
   potatoes Macaire, 414                      pepper–crusted black-and­             creamed, 431
   roasted potatoes, 414                      blue steak stuffed with spicy         with garlic, quick-sautéed, 427
   roesti potatoes, 410                       sesame spinach with, 93–94            grilled veal T-bones with a hobo
sirloin, 5, 23, 36, 38, 39              spaghetti with garlic and spinach,             pack of ﬁg, prosciutto and,
   ground, 140                                red wine–braised oxtails over,           200–201
   salad, Laotian-style aromatic,             143–44                                new potato hobo pack with
      102–3                             spareribs, pork, see pork spareribs            pearl onions and, 442
   steak, high plains drifter-style,    spice(s)(ed):                               red wine–braised oxtails over
      grilled, 98–99                       apples, panfried brined loin                spaghetti with garlic and,
   tips stir-fried with ginger,               chops stuffed with walnuts               143–44
      peanuts, and scallions over             and Stilton cheese with,              seared balsamic-glazed top
      smoky sesame cabbage,                   358–60                                   blade chuck steaks with
      101–2                                aromatic, rice pilaf with lime              lemon, olive oil and, 108–9
skirt steak, 3, 39, 40, 116                   zest, pine nuts and, 417              sesame, spicy-stewed pork with
   lime-soaked, cumin-crusted              -rubbed grilled lamb skewers                eggplant, chiles and,
      grilled, with green olive-chile         with peanut-herb power pack              398–99
      relish, 112–13                          (Indobob), 291–92                     spicy sesame, stuffed white
   sliced grilled, on Greek salad,         sweet toasted, mango-braised                pepper-crusted black-and­
      113–14                                  lamb shoulder and tomato-                blue steak with soy-wasabi
   Southeast Asian-style grilled,             cucumber relish and, 275–77              dipping sauce, 93–94
      with aromatic greens and             toasted, African-style beef and          wilted, with sweet-and-sour
      ginger-lime dressing, 110–11            tuber stew with, 128–29                  bacon dressing, under grilled
slaw:                                   spicy:                                         sweetbreads, 236–37
   cashew, sautéed pork cutlets            green olive and sun-dried             split peas, Indian-spiced green,
      with chile ﬂavor booster and,           tomato relish, grilled veal              smoked ham hocks with,
      364–65                                  loin chops with, 196–97                  404–6



                                                                                                            INDEX      463
      squash, acorn, stuffed with spicy         stufﬁng:                                Swiss chard, a severe tongue
             lamb and rice, with dates,            apricot-sausage, roast pork loin          hashing with turnips and,
             mint, and pine nuts,                     with rosemary-garlic jus and,          156–57
             313–14                                   334–37
      squash, butternut:                           chestnut, rack of veal with          T   -bone steak, 5, 38, 39
         hobo pack with spinach and                   brandied oranges, light basil       for two, Mr. Perfect, 89–90
             apricots, 442                            jus and, 166–68                   Texas, Texas-style dishes, 36
         orange-and-chile-stewed                sweet-and-sour:                           barbecued whole beef brisket
             bottom round steaks with              bacon dressing, grilled                   with pastrami-style rub and
             oregano and, 120–21                      sweetbreads over wilted                grainy mustard-horseradish
      squash, winter, roasted, 435                    spinach with, 236–37                   sauce, 70–72
      squash, yellow, hobo pack with               braised bottom round steak with        ground beef casserole with
             lime, spicy, 441                         eggplant and ginger, 82–83             sweet potato crust and A-1
      steaks, 5, 36, 38, 39                        braised cabbage and fennel slaw,          parsley butter, 138–39
         ﬂat, 116; see also ﬂank steak;               orange-braised veal shoulder        toast, grilled veal ﬂank steak on,
             hanger steak; skirt steak                with, 186–87                           with yellow tomato chutney
         shaved, bomb—fully loaded                 Madeira sauce, seared calf ’s             and balsamic raisins, 216–17
             with mushrooms, onions,                  liver with bacon, onions and,     thyme:
             and peppers, 135–36                      237–38                              lima beans with bacon and, 431
         see also speciﬁc steak cuts               red cabbage slaw, orange-stewed        sautéed medallions of veal with
      steak sauce, homemade, pepper-                  country-style pork ribs with,          artichoke hearts, lemon and,
             crusted grilled strip loin steak         387–88                                 201–2
             with mushroom hobo packs              seared red onions, molasses-         toast(ed):
             and, 96–98                               glazed pork tenderloin with         lamb tongues, bacon, and
      stewing, stews, 24–25                           sage-date power pack and,              tomatoes on, 317–18
         great, 10 steps to, 119, 218, 301,           376–77                              marrow hobo packs on, 153
             386                                   slaw, barbecued lamb shoulder          scrambled eggs, calf ’s brains,
         see also beef stew; lamb stew;               Kentucky-style, with chile-            and trufﬂe oil on, 233–34
             pork stew; veal stew meat                vinegar sauce, 273–74               sweet spices, mango-braised
      stew meat, 3, 7, 24                       sweetbreads, 7                               lamb shoulder with tomato-
         see also beef stew meat; veal             veal, 163                                 cucumber relish and, 275–77
             stew meat                             veal, grilled, over wilted spinach     Texas, grilled veal ﬂank steak
      Stilton (cheese):                               with sweet-and-sour bacon              on, with yellow tomato
         -stuffed apples, simple veal                 dressing, 236–37                       chutney and balsamic raisins,
             rump roast with, 172–73            sweet potato(es):                            216–17
         -and-walnuts-stuffed panfried             candied, 436                         tomato, cherry, -ginger conﬁt,
             brined loinchops with spiced          and corned beef hash with red             garlic-studded, mustard-
             apples, 358–60                           wine-caramelized onions,               crusted roasted shoulder of
      stir-fry(ied):                                  148–49                                 lamb with rosemary jus and,
         lamb with green beans,                    crust, new school shepherd’s pie          266–67
             eggplants, and peppers in                with, 311–12                      tomato, sun-dried:
             hoisin-ginger sauce,                  crust, Texas-style ground beef         -basil relish, grilled pork and ﬁg
             299–300                                  casserole with A-1 parsley             skewers with, 382–83
         sirloin tips with ginger, peanuts,           butter and, 138–39                  and green olive relish, spicy,
             and scallions over smoky              crusty, honey-and-bourbon­                grilled veal loin chops with,
             sesame cabbage, 101–2                    glazed roasted loin of veal            196–97
         veal, on big fried polenta                   with Smithﬁeld ham-raisin         tomato, yellow:
             croutons, 212–13                         jus and, 170–71                     chutney, grilled veal ﬂank steak
      straw potatoes, 411                          fried, Cuban-style braised beef           on Texas toast with balsamic
      strip loin steak:                               blade steak with olives,               raisins and, 216–17
         pepper-crusted grilled, with                 raisins and, 63–64                  -ginger jam, grill-roasted whole
             homemade steak sauce and              fried, mango-stewed pork with,            loin of beef with, 52–53
             mushroom hobo packs, 96–98               392–93                            tomato(es):
         in the style of Diane, pan-seared         garlic-studded roast eye of            -bacon relish, smoky, grilled
             thin, 94–95                              round with South American              beef liver and slab bacon
         white pepper–crusted black-                  parsley-caper sauce and,               kebab on cornmeal mush
             and-blue, stuffed with spicy             54–55                                  with, 154–56
             sesame spinach with soy­              piccata-style kebabs of grilled        balsamic-braised pot roast with
             wasabi dipping sauce,                    veal, red onion and, 214–15            lemons, raisins, black olive-
             93–94                                 -raisin hobo pack, 441                    pine nut relish and, 66–68




464   INDEX
  -blue cheese relish, a hot open-     tongue(s):                                   veal breast, 162
     faced veal meat loaf                 hashing with turnips and Swiss              barbecued Latin-Style with sour
     sandwich with arugula and,              chard, a severe, 156–57                      orange–chipotle barbecue
     224–25                               lamb, on toast with bacon and                   sauce, 178–79
  -braised veal shanks with                  tomatoes, 317–18                         beer-braised, with Macumber
     pumpkin risotto and lemon-        tournedos, black pan-seared, with                  turnips and greens,
     pistachio power pack,                   asparagus, crab, and A-1                     180–81
     182–84                                  hollandaise, 91–92                     veal chops, 162
  -cucumber relish, mango-braised      tripe stew, hangover-style, 151–52           veal ﬂank steak, 162
     lamb shoulder with sweet          trufﬂe oil, scrambled eggs on toast            grilled, on Texas toast with
     toasted spices and, 275–77              with calf ’s brains and,                     yellow tomato chutney and
  curried lamb stew with okra                233–34                                       balsamic raisins, 216–17
     and, 308–9                        turnips:                                       seared, with roasted pears and
  -fennel relish, fresh, old-school       black pepper-crusted wine-                      horseradish-mustard sauce,
     Yankee pot roast with root              braised short ribs with garlic               239–40
     vegetables and, 65–66                   and, 74–75                             veal loin, 161, 162
  -ﬁg hobo pack, parsley-coated           Macumber, beer-braised veal                 honey-and-bourbon-glazed,
     grilled lamb loin with smoky            breast with greens and,                      with crusty sweet potatoes
     eggplant planks and,                    180–81                                       and Smithﬁeld ham-raisin jus,
     288–89                               mashed, 434                                     170–71
  hobo pack with basil and garlic,        a severe tongue hashing with                medallions, spicy pan-seared,
     443                                     Swiss chard and, 156–57                      with anchovies and green
  jalapeño-Cheddar grits under                                                            olives, 205–6
     spicy pork stew with okra         Veal, 12, 159–240                              see also veal ﬂank steak; veal
     and, 390–91                         cuts of, 5–8, 160–63                             T-bones; veal tenderloin(s)
  lamb tongues on toast with             grades of, 9, 164                          veal loin chop(s), 162
     bacon and, 317–18                   great, 10 steps to, 165, 177, 188,           broiled, with exotic
  North African-style braised                189, 218                                     mushrooms, bacon, and
     lamb shanks with lemons,            recipes for large tender cuts of,                sherry, 194–95
     green olives and, 269–70                165–76                                   grilled, with spicy green olive
  old-school Southern-style beef         recipes for large tough cuts of,                 and sun-dried tomato relish,
     stew with corn, bacon and,              177–87                                       196–97
     130–31                              recipes for odd cuts of, 232–40            veal meat loaf, 163
  onions, and peppers and                recipes for small tender cuts of,            hot open-faced sandwich with
     crunchy parsley-bread crumb             188–217                                      arugula, blue cheese-tomato
     shake, old-style chunky beef        recipes for small tough cuts of,                 relish and, 224–25
     and beer stew with, 122–23              218–31                                 veal rib chops, 161–62
  Persian-style lamb and eggplant        stock, 33                                    simple, with smoky portobello
     stew with raisins, saffron and,     see also brains, calf ’s; calf ’s liver;         relish, 197–98
     302–3                                   speciﬁc cuts                             see also veal, rack of
  sauce, spicy, basil-crusted meat     veal, ground:                                veal riblets (short ribs), 162
     loaf with brandy, walnuts           in Southeast Asian-style cakes               pepper-crusted, braised with red
     and, 145–46                             with aromatic herbs and two                  onions over mushroom
  simply brown veal stew with                dipping sauces, 222–23                       risotto, 220–21
     peppers, capers and, 227–28         see also veal meat loaf                      stewed with beer, bacon, and
  and watercress salad, broiled        veal, rack of, 161, 162                            beans, 219–20
     lamb kidneys with grainy            with chestnut stufﬁng, brandied            veal round (or leg), 161, 162
     mustard sauce and, 316–17               oranges, and light basil jus,            grilled, sweet potato, and red
tomatoes, oven-dried, veal                   166–68                                       onion kebabs in the piccata
     steamship round with green          rosemary-crusted roasted, with                   style, 214–15
     olives and, 174–76                      exotic mushrooms, white                  paillard with pancetta, white
tomatoes, roasted:                           wine, and lemon, 168–69                      mushrooms, and Madeira,
  garlic-, very impressive roasted     veal birdies, 162                                  203–4
     lamb saddle with peach-             mango-stuffed, with                          panfried cutlets in the German
     pomegranate sauce and,                  cognac–green peppercorn                      style, 206–7
     262–64                                  sauce, 210–11                            sautéed medallions, with
  -garlic relish, Chianti-and­           Tidewater-style, with Smithﬁeld                  artichoke hearts, lemon, and
     balsamic-braised lamb shanks            ham, backﬁn crab, and                        thyme, 201–2
     over creamy Parmesan                    lemon-caper sauce,                       see also veal birdies; veal rump
     polenta with, 270–72                    208–9                                        roast; veal steamship round



                                                                                                               INDEX      465
      veal rump roast, 162
        simple, with Stilton-stuffed
                                              seared, over watercress and
                                                 walnuts with blue cheese-         Walnuts:
            apples, 172–73                       Madeira sauce, 190–91               basil-crusted meat loaf with
      veal shank, 13, 161                     tips stir-fry on big fried polenta        brandy, spicy tomato sauce
        EZ-style sherry-braised, with            croutons, 212–13                       and, 145–46
            raisins and parsley, 184–85    vegetables(s):                            lamb, leek, and white bean stew
        tomato-braised, with pumpkin          hobo pack, autumn, 443                    with oregano, hard cheese
            risotto and lemon-pistachio       minted, sautéed lamb                      and, 305–6
            power pack, 182–84                   medallions with red                 seared veal tenderloins over
      veal shoulder chops, 161, 163              wine–pomegranate sauce                 watercress and, with blue
        grilled, with nectarine-ginger           and, 290–91                            cheese-Madeira sauce,
            chutney and cucumbers with        root, old-school Yankee pot               190–91
            mint and yogurt,                     roast with fresh tomato-            -and-Stilton cheese-stuffed
            198–99                               fennel relish and, 65–66               panfried brined loin chops,
        orange-braised, with sweet-and­       spicy Korean, hoisin-glazed               with spiced apples,
            sour braised cabbage and             grilled pork blade chops with,         358–60
            fennel slaw, 186–87                  372–73                            wasabi-soy dipping sauce, white
        see also veal shank                   spring, and veal stew with                pepper–crusted black-and­
      veal steamship round, 162                  bacon and chervil, 228–29              blue steak stuffed with spicy
        with green olives and oven-           see also speciﬁc vegetables               sesame spinach with,
            dried tomatoes, 174–76         vinaigrette:                                 93–94
      veal stew meat, 161, 163                creamy braised garlic-               watercress:
        sausage, and fava bean stew              Parmesan, grilled double-           -pineapple salad, BBQ-rubbed
            with lemony greens,                  thick lamb loin chops with             grilled fresh ham center slice
            230–31                               roasted peppers and onions             with, 384–85
        in simple brown stew with                and, 282–83                         seared veal tenderloins over
            tomatoes, peppers, and            cumin-raisin, grilled lamb and            walnuts and, with blue
            capers, 227–28                       peach skewers with, 293–94             cheese-Madeira sauce,
        spring, and vegetable stew with       raisin-parsley, crusty rack of            190–91
            bacon and chervil,                   lamb with, 251–52                   and tomato salad, broiled lamb
            228–29                         vinegar:                                     kidneys with grainy mustard
        in white stew with mushrooms,         -braised ﬂank steak, Puerto               sauce and, 316–17
            corn, and sherry, 225–26
      veal T-bones, grilled, with a hobo
                                                 Rican, with cabbage, corn,
                                                 and yucca salad, 77–79            Yorkshire pudding, boneless rib
            pack of ﬁg, prosciutto, and       -chile sauce, barbecued lamb              roast “prime rib-style” au jus
            spinach, 200–201                     shoulder Kentucky-style with           with, 46–47
      veal tenderloin(s):                        sweet-and-sour slaw and,          you gotta have (grilled beef ) heart,
        hazelnut-crusted, with roasted           273–74                                 Peruvian-style, 149–50
            grapes and port, 192–93           see also balsamic




466   INDEX
OTHER BOOKS BY CHRIS SCHLESINGER
AND JOHN WILLOUGHBY


The Thrill of the Grill
  Techniques, Recipes, and Down-Home Barbecue

Salsas, Sambals, Chutneys & Chowchows
  Intensely Flavored “Little Dishes” from Around the World

Big Flavors of the Hot Sun
  Hot Recipes and Cool Tips from the Spice Zone

Lettuce in Your Kitchen
  Where Salad Gets a Whole New Spin and Dressings Do Double Duty

License to Grill
  Achieve Greatness at the Grill with 200 Sizzling Recipes
                           Credits

Designed by Richard Oriolo
Illustrations by Jennifer Harper additional illustrations by Alexis
Seabrook
                            Copyright


HOW TO COOK MEAT. Copyright © 2000 by Chris Schlesinger and John
Willoughby. All rights reserved under International and Pan-American
Copyright Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been
granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the
text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or
introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form
or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins e-books.

Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader April 2009
ISBN 978-0-06-191371-6

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
About the Publisher

Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au

Canada
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900
Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca

New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk

United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com
