SWEET



BANANA CREAM PIE WITH SAKE KASU ICE CREAM

Sometimes also known as banoffee pie, my banana cream pie is based on my first ever encounter with such a dessert when I was working in a small but very busy restaurant in Toronto, Canada. If I’m honest, and you know that means I’m going to be brutally honest, I thought this was a total fucking joke. An Americanised, home cook’s creation, which is worthy of a truck-stop diner at best. And what pissed me off even more was that these chefs were so damn proud of it and the customers spoke about it as if this was a revelation. Jeeze, I was thinking that the truck drivers could come up with better, more innovative desserts than this. So there I was, each day as the kitchen wound down from the hustle and bustle, the heated arguments and the tense air of it all, finishing up with the constructing and plating of pie after pie. I’d do my best to refine it and make it a little more perfect than the head chef could (which wasn’t hard – he had fingers like tree stumps and was pickled in whisky). But one day it happened – this is a much improved version.

The ice cream makes more than is needed here, but it can be eaten another time.

MAKES 6 PIES

3 bananas, roughly chopped, plus extra slices to decorate

caster sugar, to dust

puffed soba

For the sake kasu ice cream

180g sake kasu, broken into pieces

60ml sake

1 litre full-cream milk

40g trimoline

60g liquid glucose

300g double cream

200g caster sugar

70g milk powder

For the filo shell

120ml clarified butter, melted

180g caster sugar

200g filo pastry, cut into 15cm x 15cm squares

For the tonka caramel

180g caster sugar

50g salted butter

300ml double cream

100g liquid glucose

5 tonka beans, finely grated

60g milk chocolate, chopped into small pieces

For the custard

400g milk

80g caster sugar

30g unsalted butter

1 vanilla pod, split and seeds scraped

35g plain flour

3 egg yolks

Equipment

blowtorch

First make the ice cream. Soak the sake kasu in a bowl with the sake for 1 hour at room temperature and then blend until smooth.

In a pan, combine the milk, trimoline, glucose and cream. Bring to the boil.

In a separate bowl, combine the sugar, milk powder and the sake kasu mix, and mix together well. Pour into the milk mixture, whisk well, then strain. Leave to cool down and then churn until firm, which should take about 25 minutes in a decent ice cream machine. Freeze until required.

I use square metal moulds to make the pie shells, roughly about 8cm x 8cm, but if you have circles, triangles or even a muffin tin you’ll be fine. First, brush your moulds with the clarified butter. Evenly coat the inside of the moulds with sugar and shake until well coated – remove any excess sugar and then set the moulds to one side.

Keep your filo covered with a lightly damp cloth so that it doesn’t dry out – if it does you’re screwed and you’ll need new pastry. Lay down the first of your pastry squares, brush well with butter and lightly scatter sugar over the top (evenly), then place a second square on top and press them together so that they stick. Repeat this so you have 5 squares combined. Now pick up your buttery sheets and carefully line 1 of the moulds, gently pressing the pastry into the base and every corner if you’re using a square mould. Repeat the process until all your moulds are lined and then refrigerate for 1 hour.

Preheat the oven to 180°C/160°C fan/Gas Mark 4 and bake the pastry moulds from cold for 15 minutes, until the pastry turns a dark golden colour.

Remove from the oven and run a paring knife between the pastry and the mould to prevent the pastry sticking to the mould once it cools. Allow them to cool in the moulds for 6–7 minutes (it should still be fairly warm) and then tip the moulds over and lift them away from the pastry cases. Store them on a wire rack in a cold dry place until required.

To make the caramel heat the sugar in a saucepan until it caramelises, take off the heat and cool for 3 minutes or so. Whisk in the butter. In a separate saucepan, warm the cream, glucose and tonka beans and then pour this into the caramel. Let it cool to about 30°C/85°F, then stir in the milk chocolate. Leave to cool. This caramel can be made in advance, chilled and then served at room temperature.

To make the custard, bring 300ml milk, 40g sugar, the butter and vanilla seeds to the boil and then remove from the heat.

In a bowl whisk the remaining 100ml milk and 40g sugar with the flour and egg yolks until there are no lumps.

Pour about a third of the buttery milk into the milk-egg mixture and whisk like hell so it’s super-smooth with no lumps. Pour in the remaining buttery milk and mix well. Strain the mixture through a medium-coarse muslin-lined sieve into a wide pan and cook over a medium-low heat, stirring continuously with a wooden spoon. It’s done when the custard nicely coats the back of the spoon – this ought to take between 6 and 8 minutes, depending on what you consider a medium-low heat. Strain again and then let the mixture cool. Cover with clingfilm and chill until required.

When you’re ready to consume, it is time to construct. Now that the heavy prep is done, this is the easy part.

Take a filo shell and set it up on a sweet-looking plate. For each pie, mix about 80g custard with about half a roughly chopped banana and 1 tablespoon of the tonka caramel. Combine well and pour into the shell. Top with some more tonka caramel – apparently it’s not to everyone’s taste, so how much you use is up to you (for me I add loads!) – and finish off with a few banana slices. Evenly sprinkle some caster sugar on top and use a blowtorch with a low flame to caramelise them – be careful not to flame the shell as it will burn immediately. Sprinkle with puffed soba and serve with a dollop of sake kasu ice cream on the side.



Banana Cream Pie with Sake Kasu Ice Cream

GEN MAI CHA SOFT SERVE IN SESAME ICE CREAM CONES

Soft serve is pretty easy to make when you have a soft-serve machine – so what are you waiting for? But there is a way to make it happen if you don’t have a machine – you just need a mixer and some dry ice (a quick internet search will find you a local provider).

You see a lot of matcha ice cream around but I’ve never been a massive fan; I love the tea itself but I reckon gen mai cha, the roasted rice green tea, kicks its ass in ice cream.

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 20 MINI CONES (500ML ICE CREAM)

(YOU MIGHT THINK THAT’S A LOT BUT IT MIGHT NOT BE ENOUGH – THESE FUCKERS ARE MOREISH. THEY MIGHT BE 1 BITE FOR SOME OR 3 OR 4 BITES FOR NIBBLERS, BUT ONE THING IS FOR SURE, NO ONE STOPS AT 1 CONE)

For the sesame cones

150g salted butter, softened

170g icing sugar

30g liquid glucose

180g black sesame seeds

20g white sesame seeds

140ml orange juice

45g plain flour

For the gen mai cha ice cream base

85g gen mai cha (roasted rice green tea)

1.2 litres full-cream milk

40g trimoline

60g liquid glucose

300g double cream

200g caster sugar

70g milk powder

For the ice cream

400g dry ice

Equipment

ice cream cone moulds

To make the cones, heat the butter, icing sugar and glucose in a saucepan to 95°C/200°F, and mix slowly. Add both sesame seeds, the orange juice and flour and continue mixing. Stabilise the temperature between 40°C and 50°C (100°F and 120°F), not higher or lower. Take off the heat, cool to room temperature, and then refrigerate for at least 1 hour.

Ideally, bake your cones on the day you need them, as the crunch is always best fresh. Preheat your oven to 180°C/160°C fan/Gas Mark 4.

You need a baking tray or silicon mat and a circular template, such as a plastic ice cream tub lid about 10cm in diameter. On a sheet of baking parchment, cut out a circle using the plastic lid – you now have your template.

Using a spatula or, even better, an angled palate knife, smear the cold sesame mixture as evenly as you can over the cut-out onto a silicon baking mat. Once the mixture is an overall, even thickness and the circle is filled, carefully remove the template and repeat.

Bake the circles for 7–8 minutes until golden. Remove from the oven and allow to cool for 1 minute. Using your spatula or angled palette knife, while the circles are still warm, carefully lift them one by one and twirl into a cone shape. If you have one of those old-fashioned metal pastry cones in the house, shape the pastry around that. The cones will harden in seconds and then voila, you have your cones.

Top tip: if your baked circles have been out of the oven too long and are cracking before they can be shaped then simply pop them back in the oven for 30 seconds and you’re back in business.

Store them in an airtight container until required.

The soft serve (or ‘softo’ as it’s known in Japanese), is also best made the day you need it, in fact right before eating, unless you have a Mr Whippy truck or a soft-serve machine. Here’s the mixing machine and dry ice version…

Soak the tea in the milk for 12 hours in the fridge and then strain to remove any bits. (I don’t boil or heat the tea infusion as tannins are increased when you do this. For this purpose, I think cold infusions are much nicer.)

In a pan, combine the milk, trimoline, glucose and cream, and bring to the boil.

In a separate bowl, combine the sugar and milk powder, and mix together well. Whisk this with the milk mixture and then strain. Leave to cool down. This is your base.

Work with 500ml of the ice cream base at a time, and pour it into your mixer with the whisk attachment fixed on. Whisk on speed 6 or 7 until it’s foaming slightly.

Now it’s dry ice time – you’ll need about 100g per 500ml ice cream.

Smash up the dry ice in a tea towel – use a cricket bat or other solid wooden weapon – until you have small, fine pieces. Bit by bit, tip this into the whisking ice cream base mixture and after about 1½ minutes you will see it looking very foamy. Continue to add all the dry ice until it’s incorporated – after 2 minutes you should have a firm, creamy soft serve.

Working quickly, scoop the ice cream into a piping bag with your favourite nozzle attachment (or just a star). Pipe the soft serve into the cones in a circular motion. They melt fairly fast so eat ’em up!



Gen Mai Cha Soft Serve in Sesame Ice Cream Cones

ICED RASPBERRY PARFAIT WITH BLACK SUGAR SYRUP

The inspiration for this comes from two separate parts of the planet. The syrup is a classic Japanese one named kuro mitsu and in summer it wouldn’t be uncommon to see it generously poured over vanilla ice cream – such a brilliant, simple treat to sooth the hot and humid days during Japan’s summers. The other part – the parfait – is from my mate Dave (Mungbean) Allen, back in western Australia. When we were apprentice chefs (he was my senior) he came up with a honey-nougat parfait with grapefruit – it was excellent and I always refer to it.

SERVES 10

1 gelatine leaf

75g caster sugar

225g honey

50g corn syrup

4 egg whites

250g raspberries, 150g roughly chopped and 100g halved

620g double cream, whipped to soft peaks

finely grated zest of 1 orange

For the kuro mitsu

100g muscovado sugar

To serve

a handful of raspberries

roasted walnuts, chopped

First, line a semi-deep tray or brownie tin (about 30cm × 20cm) with clingfilm.

Soak the gelatine leaf in a small bowl of cold water to soften for 5 minutes.

Cook the sugar, honey and corn syrup together in a pan until it reaches about 120°C/250°F.

Next, drain the gelatine and squeeze out any excess water. In the bowl of a standmixer, whisk the egg whites and soaked gelatine leaf until the egg whites are starting to foam. With the mixer on, slowly drizzle in the syrup, in a constant stream, until the syrup is all incorporated and the mixture stiff and shiny.

Remove the bowl from the mixer, add the raspberries, whipped cream and orange zest, and fold until evenly combined. Pour the mixture into the prepared tray and cover with clingfilm. Freeze for at least 3 hours, or until solid, before cutting.

To make the kuro mitsu, heat the sugar in a pan and cook gently, without stirring, until you have a dark sugar syrup – this should take about 5 minutes. Cool to room temperature before use.

Serve up 3 or 4 small blocks of the parfait per person and top with some more chopped or broken up raspberries and chopped roasted walnuts. Drizzle with plenty of kuro mitsu or serve it on the side.



Iced Raspberry Parfait with Black Sugar Syrup

ICED PASSION FRUIT AND SAKE PARFAIT

When I was a kid, we had passion fruit growing on the wire fence of the ‘chook yard’ (the place where we kept our chickens). I suppose I took it for granted that we had such amazing, ripe, organic (chook poo is a great fertiliser) and fairly sweet passion fruit on our doorstep. I don’t think I’d ever eaten a store-bought number until I became an apprentice chef, when I first tasted mass-produced, sometimes-dry and not-very-sweet passion fruit. I mean, they should be slightly tangy but these things were more like a big spoonful of citric acid than a good passion fruit. What to do…?

I guess the moral of the story is to make an effort to source the best, sweetest and most well-grown passion fruit (the same goes for all sourcing really – this ought to be obvious, but I don’t reckon it always happens).

I serve these as a kind of pre-dessert. Serve at least two per person as you can’t stop at one.

MAKES AROUND 12 CUPS

1 gelatine leaf

150g caster sugar

400g honey

110g corn syrup

5 egg whites

60g sake kasu purée

500g cream, whipped

pulp from 8 passion fruits, keep 12 of the halves – wash and dry and set aside

ice cubes, to serve, optional

For the passion fruit kimi-yaki topping

5 egg whites

8 tablespoons caster sugar

80ml passoa (passion fruit liqueur)

1 teaspoon yuzu juice

1 tablespoon sake (unpasteurised if possible)

Equipment

blowtorch

Soak the gelatine leaf in a small bowl of cold water for 5 minutes.

Meanwhile, boil the sugar, honey and corn syrup in a pan until it reaches 120°C/250°F. Start to whip the egg whites in a large bowl when the sugar reaches about 85°C/185°F, and as soon as the sugar syrup reaches the magic 120°C/250°F, pour it over the whipping egg whites in a steady stream until well incorporated and you are left with a thickened, shiny meringue.

Remove the gelatine from the water and squeeze out the excess water; mix with the sake kasu purée, until completely dispersed. Fold this into the egg white mixture until combined and then fold in the whipped cream and passion fruit pulp.

Scoop the mixture into the cleaned passion fruit halves and pile it high. Freeze for at least 1½ hours.

For the passion fruit kimi-yaki topping, pick a pan that a stainless-steel bowl sits on top of neatly. Half-fill the pan with water and bring to the boil.

In the stainless-steel bowl, vigorously whisk all the ingredients until you achieve a pale, thick mixture. Set the bowl over the boiling water and continue to whisk until it has quadrupled in size. Remove from the heat and leave to cool.

To serve, remove the passion fruit cups from the freezer and allow to sit at room temperature for 2 minutes. Scoop a generous teaspoon of the passion fruit kimi-yaki topping over each cup and then gently blowtorch the topping. Serve up on a bed of ice to really impress.



Iced Passion Fruit and Sake Parfait

SOBA ICE CREAM WITH CARAMELISED APRICOTS

Soba grain (aka buckwheat) makes killer ice cream – simply overcook it, blend it up and you’re well on your way to a brilliant new ice cream flavour. I’m going to presume that not many people have made this before – if you have, get over it!

It goes without saying that using properly ripe apricots is best. If you can’t source them, tinned apricots will do a reasonable job – in fact I’d rather tinned over unripe, tasteless apricots.

SERVES 4

For the soba ice cream

500ml gen mai cha ice cream base

300g soba grains (or use buckwheat grains if you can’t source soba)

For the umeshu jelly

3 gelatine leaves

200ml umeshu (Japanese plum liqueur)

For the caramelised apricots

120ml unsalted butter

4–6 apricots, cut in half, stone removed

100g soft light brown sugar

60ml sake

40ml mirin

60ml umeshu

To serve

zest of 1 lime

toasted coconut flakes, optional

To make the ice cream, put the milk ice cream base and 200ml of water in a pan with the soba grains. Bring to the boil and cook for about 15 minutes, until very soft. (Japanese grains tend to cook really quickly.)

Pour through a fine sieve into a bowl, and then blend until smooth, adding a little of the cooking milk (just enough to get the blades of the blender cutting the grains and blending nicely).

Churn as per your ice cream maker’s instructions. If you don’t have an ice cream maker, see method here .

Next, make the umeshu jelly. Soak the gelatine leaves in a small bowl of water for 3–5 minutes, then drain and squeeze out any excess moisture. Line a 2mm-thick tray with clingfilm and then warm the umeshu to 65°C/150°F. Add the soaked gelatine and stir to dissolve. Pour the mix into the lined tray and chill for a minimum of 1 hour.

While this is chilling, prepare the apricots. In a non-stick pan, heat the butter until gently foaming. Arrange the apricots in the pan, flat side down, and allow them to colour a little, shaking your pan the whole time or they will stick like shit to a blanket.

Once the apricots are starting to colour, add the brown sugar, sake, mirin and umeshu and simmer over a medium-high heat until the apricots start to soften. Flip the apricots over and finish cooking through. Turn the heat up and allow the juices to thicken slightly. Remove from the heat and allow to cool for 5 minutes before serving.

To serve, divide the slightly warmed apricots so you have 2–3 halves per person, and add a large scoop of soba ice cream to the dish. Add some juices from the apricots and grate over some fresh lime zest, to decorate. Toasted coconut is a good addition, too.



Soba Ice Cream with Caramelised Apricots

WARM DONUTS WITH YUZU CURD

Fresh, hot donuts – what a great thing. A wonderful childhood memory, or so I thought. I can’t for the life of me work out where the hell I would have had freshly made donuts as a kid in the part of the world where I come from. Maybe these were the ones I was yearning for when I ate the stale jam-filled whopper donuts from our local bakery. You’ll notice two coatings here, matcha and sugar, and soba and sugar. Both are filled with yuzu curd, right before serving up. Do it too early and you’ll see it all drip away. Fuck, even do it in front of the guests, why the hell not?!

MAKES ABOUT 40–50 DONUTS

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

For the first mix

15g live yeast, dissolved in warm water

250g plain flour

For the second mix

15g live fresh yeast

200g full-cream milk, warmed to 40°C/105°F

500g plain flour

25g caster sugar

80g butter, melted

120g egg yolks (approx. 8 eggs)

1 teaspoon sea salt

For the yuzu curd

½ gelatine leaf

180g unsalted butter, melted and cooled a little so it’s slightly warm

150g sugar

100g yuzu juice

2 eggs

For the soba sugar

250g sugar

80g puffed soba

For the matcha sugar

250g sugar

2 teaspoons matcha powder

To make the first mix, use a standmixer fitted with the dough hook attachment, and mix the yeast and flour together with 125ml of water, until well incorporated. Remove the dough from the mixer, cover in clingfilm and let it prove at room temperature for 2 hours until it’s doubled in size.

For the second mix, dissolve the yeast in the warm milk and then set aside to cool. Mix the flour and sugar in a standmixer (again, using the dough hook attachment). Pour in the milk and yeast mixture, and combine well on speed 6 or 7.

Add the melted butter, egg yolks and salt, and mix well. Finally, add in the first mixture to this second mix and combine. Leave the combined dough in the fridge overnight or for a good 4–5 hours, minimum.

In the meantime, prepare the curd. Put the gelatine leaf in ice-cold water and set aside. Mix the rest of the ingredients in a heatproof bowl. Set the bowl over a pan of simmering water (make sure the bottom of the bowl doesn’t touch the water) and cook quickly for 8–10 minutes, until the mixture thickens, then take off the heat and stir in the gelatine. Pour the mixture into a blender and blitz until the mixture turns a pale yellow colour. Pour into a bowl and chill in the fridge to set.

You can also use this time to prepare the sugar coatings. Blend together the sugar and puffed soba until fine, and then set aside. In a separate bowl, mix the sugar and matcha, and set this aside, too.

Once the dough has proved, divide the mix into 10g balls.

Heat your spanking clean oil in a fryer or large pan to 180°C/350°F, and fry the donuts in batches until golden, roughly about 3½–4 minutes, turning once. When you have fried the required amount of donuts, remove with a perforated scoop and allow them to briefly cool on kitchen paper for a max of 1 minute.

Poke a hole in the balls with the fat end of a chopstick. Pipe in as much yuzu curd as you can – make it overflow.

Roll half the balls in the soba sugar and the other half in the matcha sugar, coating them well. Plate up and sprinkle over more sugar on top and on the plate.

Eat fast, make more!



Warm Donuts with Yuzu Curd

FRIED RASPBERRY ICE CREAM ‘HARUMAKI’ WITH BOOZY SHOCHU CHERRIES

This is a bit of a ‘user-upper’ kind of dish. I totally cheat and cut up little rectangles of the iced raspberry parfait , wrap it up in a sheet of feuilles de brick, refreeze for an hour or so, flash fry and voila! Also, I totally loved fried desserts as a kid – fried pineapple, fried banana and of course fried ice cream – all of which came from the local Chinese restaurant and probably the same deep-fat fryer where the majority of the main menu originated.

So, here we are – ice cream-based spring rolls (‘harumaki’ is the Japanese word for spring roll). This probably wouldn’t work with your run of the mill, shop-bought ice cream – they have been developed to be perfectly scoopable and yet stable in less than ideal freezing conditions, but subject them to a deep-fryer and I reckon you’ll have some seriously dangerous explosions going on. Stick to this recipe for the safest results.

SERVES 2

2 sheets feuilles de brick pastry

20g tempura flour

4 x 6cm x 2.5cm logs of iced raspberry parfait (cut with a hot, wet knife and once cut immediately refrozen for at least 1 hour before wrapping)

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

For the boozy shochu cherries

300g ripe cherries, washed, stems removed, roughly pounded in a mortar and stones removed

1 litre shochu (rice-based is my preference)

200ml cherry brandy

4 star anise

1mm round slice of ginger

You’ll need to start making the boozy shochu cherries a good 11–12 days in advance, so plan well ahead. I suggest making a full batch – it’s more than you’ll need for this recipe but you’ll be thankful (or not) when you see these little fuckers winking at you from their jar when you stand staring into your fridge.

Mix the cherries into the shochu and decant into a Kilner jar or similar. Allow to sit in a fairly cool room for 10 days – this is really important, it needs to be a cool room! Chill in the fridge until needed.

In a saucepan, combine the strained shochu, cherry brandy, star anise and ginger and bring to the boil. Reduce the heat. Using the point of a skewer, make about 10 small holes in each cherry.

Drop the cherries into the hot liquid and cook for 25 minutes. Remove from the heat and allow to cool down, then chill in an airtight jar. Keep refrigerated for a day or so before use.

On the day you want to serve, cut 4 triangular shapes from the pastry, edges about 15cm each, and set aside.

Mix the tempura flour with just a little water and whisk until you have a semi-thick paste. Brush your first triangle all over with the flour mix. Take an iced parfait log from the freezer; place it 1.5cm from the bottom of the pastry and roll it up towards the point of the triangle. Press the pastry at either end to ensure the parfait is sealed.

Brush a little more flour mix on the tip of the pastry to help secure it and freeze immediately. Repeat the process for the remaining 3 logs and pastry pieces.

After at least an hour or so, and when you’re ready to serve, heat the super-clean oil in a fryer or large pan to 180°C/350°F. Once hot, take the parfait logs straight from the freezer and fry for about 1½ minutes, until golden.

Strain off some of the juices from the cherries before serving with the fried parfait logs.



Fried Raspberry Ice Cream ‘Harumaki’ with Boozy Shochu Cherries

COLD SUSHI RICE AND YAKULT PUDDING

The Yakult happened to be in the right place at the right time and that was it – it was dumped into the chilled rice pudding and it was fucking great!

For those of you who don’t know what Yakult is, firstly where the hell have you been? And secondly it is a fermented milk drink, which contains a load of probiotic bacteria which was named Lactobacillus Casei Shirota, after the Japanese scientist, Minoru Shirota, who created it.

You can top this with whatever takes your fancy. Here, I have used the boozy shochu cherries and some pistachios, but you might also want to try it with coconut ice cream, yuzu custard or whisky-soaked raisins.

SERVES 6

125g salted butter

150g caster sugar

200g sushi rice

1.8 litres milk

300ml double cream

4–6 × 65ml bottles Yakult

To serve

18 boozy shochu cherries

a few pistachios, lightly crushed

Preheat the oven the 110°C/90°C fan/Gas Mark ¼.

Melt the butter and sugar in a saucepan over a medium-high heat, stirring occasionally until it turns golden brown.

Add the rice, stir well until completely combined and the rice is well coated, and then pour in the milk and cream. This will immediately cause the caramel to harden – this is normal and it will melt.

Bring the mix to the boil and then pour into a 3-litre capacity casserole dish, cover with parchment paper and place into the preheated oven. Bake for approximately 1½ hours, until thick and creamy.

Allow the rice pudding to cool down and then chill. Give it a good hour or so in the fridge before you stir though the Yakult. The trick is to add the Yakult right before serving so that it doesn’t get absorbed by the rice and thicken again slightly, which is what will happen if you do it too far in advance. I like my rice pudding to have quite a wet texture so I’d go for adding all 6 bottles. If you’re not so sure, add 4 and see how you like the taste and texture.

Top with the boozy shochu cherries and pistachios, or whatever your topping of choice is.



Cold Sushi Rice and Yakult Pudding