DRINKING



APPLE, LIME AND JASMINE INFUSION

Iced teas are my drink of choice – if I’m off the hard stuff! I’d never really been into iced tea until I moved to France. Lipton lemon or peach flavours were everywhere, and even though it was freezing cold (I was in Chamonix), iced tea was the quencher of choice: watery enough to quench, sweet enough to make you feel half alive again after a big night out.

This version hails from an overindulgent period when I lived in Dubai; me and my mate, who was known as Pavlè Foreman (you know who you are), used to eat so much fucking food we both become seriously fat (it’s what happens when bars open until 2am and burger-delivery guys are out all night). Anyway, we came across something like this version one afternoon whilst smashing dumplings, Kung Fu Panda style. We finally escaped the dust, the heat, the touchy police (that’s a different story…) and got to work on a new menu in a new town in the UK. We came up with this. It’s an all-round ripper. Use it as a quencher, top it off with ice-cold vodka, make a sorbet or do little apple cups and cleanse your diners’ palates.

SERVES 4–6

For the tea infusion

40g jasmine tea leaves

500ml cold filtered water

For the lime and lemongrass syrup

500g caster sugar

6 lemongrass stalks, bruised with the blunt end of a knife

a small handful of lime leaves (must be fresh, or use frozen – dried are rubbish)

For the base mix

500g run-of-the-mill apple juice

125ml filtered water

First make the tea infusion. Infuse the jasmine tea in the water and refrigerate for 8 hours. Strain.

Make the syrup by heating the sugar, lemongrass stalks, lime leaves and 500ml of water until the sugar dissolves. Take off the heat and leave to cool, and then store in the fridge overnight. Strain before use.

Combine the chilled tea infusion and syrup with the apple juice and water and mix well. Chill before use and serve over ice, when appropriate. This will keep in the fridge for about a week or so.



Apple, Lime and Jasmine Infusion

ICED MATCHA LATTE

Matcha is the finely ground powder made from a particular variety of green tea. It can be a really big deal in Japan and is the central focus of the Japanese tea ceremony.

Brewing the perfect matcha is not an easy skill to acquire. It involves a special whisk, some finely honed mixing skills and always a beautiful pottery bowl, from which it is sipped. The seasonal confections that are served with matcha are out of this world – works of art – taking on the shapes and colours of the season’s ingredients. In a far more bastardised way, Starbucks in Tokyo serve an addictively good iced matcha latte – go on, have it topped with squirty cream.

This is a light, almost thirst-quenching version, sans cream. We don’t encourage serving milk with our food in the restaurant, but if you really had to do it, this would be the one. Could even be a light liquid dessert.

SERVES 2

2 teaspoons matcha powder

a pinch of sea salt

250ml soy milk

90ml sugar syrup (you can buy this fairly easily, otherwise dissolve 50g caster sugar in 125ml boiling water)

ice cubes, to serve

Whisk the matcha, salt and 80ml of water together vigorously – make sure there are no lumps! Whisk in the soy milk and sugar syrup, and chill well before serving.

Serve over some ice.

Note: It could well be the basis of a boozy cocktail – try adding vanilla vodka and/or chocolate liqueur (you can work out the magical quantities).



Iced Matcha Latte

THE BONZAI KITTEN: SAKE, VODKA, CALPIS AND LIME JUICE

I once, for some (still) unclear reason, bought a 1.8-litre bottle of sake when I was out shopping for some plates for the restaurant. What to do? Well, nothing at first. Later that day, I had a few beers and then it struck me; it’s cocktail time. I added everything I had that would be sensible in a cocktail anyway. The result was pretty good, I’m quite sure. Anyway, I’ve messed about with versions over the years and finally I have one I’m pretty stoked with. You may be curious about the name. Even if you’re not, here it comes…

It’s in no way related to the drink. It just so happens that around that time, myself and a mate, Matt, had come across this really odd website (that doesn’t exist anymore) called bonsaikittens.com. Disgustingly, it showed kittens living in enclosed, tight spaces so that they remained kitten sized. As bad as it sounds, some of the photos were fairly funny, and it turned out that none of it was real – it was a total hoax. So that silly name was in my head when it was time to give this thing a name. Kampai, you cats!

You’ll need a cocktail shaker for this. Serve as a punch or in a martini glass without the ice.

MAKES 1 MARTINI-SIZED GULP…

40ml sake

30ml vodka

20ml Calpis

20ml lime juice

6 ice cubes

1 thin slice of lime, to garnish

Combine the sake, vodka, Calpis and lime juice in a cocktail shaker. Add the ice cubes and shake it hard and fast. Crack the shaker open and strain off into a frosty martini glass, then garnish with a thin slice of lime.

Alternatively, multiply this recipe by 100 and serve as a punch with chopped watermelon chunks and lime slices added.



The Bonzai Kitten: Sake, Vodka, Calpis and Lime Juice

NIKKA WHISKY ESPRESSO MARTINI

Done to death, I know, but I couldn’t give a shit. It has become a classic and it’s the perfect antidote after a long dinner or even as a change of tipple towards the end of a big night out.

We always have espresso martini on our menu and we fiddled around with this version recently, featuring Nikka Whisky From The Barrel, Nikka’s most versatile whisky, and one they are happy for us to put in cocktails. The bloke who founded Nikka many moons ago, Masataka Taketsuru, studied his craft in Scotland before bringing it back to Japan and first working for what later became his competitor, Yamazaki.

Anyway, if you pass around a tray full of these beauties at the end of your shindig, you’re bound to create a pretty sweet (colloquially) ending! Or not, the word is that this cocktail was made to both ‘pick me up and fuck me up’. You might end up making these fuckers until you run out of mix.

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 1

25ml freshly brewed espresso

30ml vanilla vodka

10ml Tia Maria

20ml Nikka Whisky From the Barrel

15ml sugar syrup

a few ice cubes

Add all the ingredients to a cocktail shaker with 3 or 4 ice cubes. Shake it like a crazy mo-fo for 30–45 seconds and strain into a chilled martini glass.

Or, should you be out and about, pre-mix it all and shake as required. Strain into your best picnic cups and voila! Cocktails in the park.



Nikka Whisky Espresso Martini

WET PUSSY

Why the hell this shot is called a ‘wet pussy’ I’ll never know! And that’s mainly because I don’t really care why; its silly name is enough to get people intrigued. And it doesn’t taste too bad either – not really selling it am I?

Well, picture this: the Kurobuta pop-up was a tiny dive-like joint in an old piano shop (how the feck the owner managed to get a piano in there still train-wrecks me). Thirty-eight seats, shitty tables, broken or breaking chairs, crazed chefs with the filthiest mouths in town and a front of house largely made up of Aussies who all thought they’d been employed to party hard 24 hours a day. Shots flew out all night long, guests would be rocking up at the pass (an Ikea table) to have shots with us or to just have a chat – in which case I made them have a shot with us. The name always broke the ice – if there was any – and I can’t recall anyone ever stopping at just one wet pussy shot.

Wanna party faster? Pre-mix a shit-load of this, chill it down until it’s ice cold and don’t look back – until tomorrow.

MAKES 1 SHOT

10ml vodka

10ml peach liqueur

10ml cranberry juice

squeeze lime juice

Mix together the vodka, peach liqueur and cranberry juice. Finish with a squeeze of lime.



Wet Pussy

LYCHEE SHOCHU SHOT

Shochu is made by distilling rice, buckwheat or sweet potato, among other things, and is the kind of beverage that when you first take a whiff, you cleanse your nose and get a tiny head rush at the same time. It immediately smells lethal, and drink enough of it and it will be. But infused with fruits, it becomes rather pleasing. The smack in the face booziness is mellowed by the fruit and it becomes dangerously masked. We infuse all kinds of fruits – grilled pineapples, mandarin (and its dried skin), Granny Smith apples, mango and so on. Lychee is, however, the one I can’t resist.

You could drink this poured over ice straight from the jar. Or, if you want to go hard, follow this recipe.

SERVES 1

For the lychee shochu (makes around 1 litre)

1 litre rice-based shochu

15 fresh lychees, peeled

For 1 shot

20ml lychee shochu

10ml vodka

5ml lychee liqueur

To make the lychee shochu, combine the shochu and the lychees and store in an airtight container in the fridge for 1 week.

Strain off the lychees and keep the remaining liquid in the fridge, or freezer if you’re about to do the shot thing…

To make the shot, mix the shochu, vodka and lychee liqueur together… line ’em up…!



Lychee Shochu Shot

SAKE BOMB

Kurobuta has always been about the party. We did shots of anything and everything on the bar, including anything the diners suggested. During our early days as a pop-up, the kitchen pass was pretty much budged up against one of the long tables and guests would see us sweating like fuck – it was pumping and felt relentless. Often we would be offered a pint of beer or a shot or two. It really helped back then, some days it was the thing that prevented us from chucking it all in. No space, floods, barely any equipment, slippery stairs (both guests and staff went crashing down almost daily – it was becoming a kind of Fawlty Towers). Needless to say the drinks ensued…

Bombs – I immediately think of the Jager bomb, I hate the bastards. To me it’s Euro-techno and Swiss teenagers vomiting on each other, funny but gross! The sake bomb was the next obvious one to try. Hesitant to begin with, I am now a total fan – it’s actually brilliant.

SERVES 1

½ pint Kirin beer (this is my recommendation, but other lagers would do)

30ml well-chilled Junmai Daiginjo sake, in a shot glass

Equipment

pair of chopsticks – split open and ready for the drop

1 pint glass

Lay the chopsticks about 1.5cm apart on top of a pint glass containing your beer. Carefully set your shot glass of sake over the chopsticks. When everyone has their shot in place, count to 3 then all bang the table with your fists – drink!



Sake Bomb