SUSHI’S FUCKED-UP FRIENDS



SUSHI

What does sushi mean to you? Is it something you have as a part of your selection at an Izakaya-type joint, a light lunch or snack? Or is sushi something worth making a pilgrimage for? Do you love and respect sushi creations as if they were something biblical?

When I was an apprentice chef, my chef took me to a sushi kitchen, you know the sushi-train joints? It was in Perth, Western Australia, and possibly one of the first sushi shops to hit town. It was called Jaws — hilarious name! Their strap line should have read ‘If you can’t beat ’em then eat ’em’ (although eating them must count as beating them, right?). I don’t recall this experience being mind-blowing in any way except for the playful name!

I continued to eat sushi from time to time, but it wasn’t until I worked for Nobu that I began to understand how in-depth, how incredible and vast the world of sushi really was. People were living and breathing sushi, these guys were far more knowledgeable and respectful towards their craft than any other chef, baker or pastry chef I’d ever met. There was a seemingly good reason behind everything they did, including the excessive golf playing, gambling and whisky guzzling!

Their rice was warm; their fish cut just right so it was silky smooth; their seasonings and sauces were balanced so well. If you’ve ever considered yourself as a capable fishmonger of sorts (and before seeing these guys in action I did a little, I guess), go watch, or better still, work with a reputable team of sushi chefs. You’ll feel like you’re starting again, day one all over. You know nothing, grasshopper!

So I’d gone from seeing sushi as something of a mild fascination that I could take or leave. I didn’t think much of cold take away sushi or even the stuff I’d tried to make myself, but now I was totally blown away.

I had never known what sushi was in the first place. All those shitty versions were like an out of work cover band and these guys were fucking Motorhead, tearing your head off on the main stage at the best music festival you’ve ever been to.

I can’t say I’m very good at sushi, I’ve never focused on it, and if I had done I still might not have enough years under my belt to be as good as some of the guys I used to work with. However, I do have loads of respect for the basics of sushi and I’ll always approach my sushi creations with a little caution.

Having said all that, I’m all about breaking the rules so whilst I always give a nod to certain rules and traditions I still think sushi fillings or toppings should be fucked with.

The sushi recipes in this chapter are the kind of recipes that sushi traditionalists would probably baulk at. They don’t align with all the rules and they include ingredients that might be unwelcome to sushi purists. Maybe these creations are sushi’s fucked up friends, but if sushi was a clean living, yoga-lovin’ society, then these guys would be the punks in the beerlight, doing burnouts.

(Apologies David Berman, Silver Jews)



TEA- SMOKED SALMON GUNKAN AND YUZU KOSHO MAYO

This type of sushi is often referred to in Japan as ‘gunkan’, which means battleship. Now, a question for you, the reader: is this because:

a) it looks like a toy battleship, or

b) when they’re too big, they’re a fucking battle to get in your mouth?

Choose whichever answer you fancy most.
(I’m pretty sure it’s A)

MAKES 5 GUNKAN

150g prepared sushi rice

5 strips nori, cut into 16cm × 3cm lengths

1 tablespoon yuzu kosho mayo

5 × 3cm strips takuan (daikon pickled with turmeric, available in Japanese shops. If you can’t find it make your own version, or use the daikon amazu pickle – see here but replace the cucumber with daikon – very different, but it works)

garlic crisps

For the hot-smoked salmon

30g sea salt, crushed until fine

¼ teaspoon sansho pepper

30g soft light brown sugar

3cm piece kombu, broken into tiny pieces and then pulverised in a mortar and pestle

a tiny pinch of shichimi togorashi

150g salmon belly (or the fattiest part you can find, ask a fishmonger for this, they might even give it to you for free!) (you need about 100g for this recipe, but start out with 150g as you’ll need to test it a few times)

smoke mix

First, make the hot-smoked salmon. Mix together all the ingredients except the salmon and the smoke mix. Rub this mixture all over the salmon and pour over any excess mixture. Tightly wrap the salmon in clingfilm and refrigerate for 2 hours.

Rinse off the salt mix and leave to dry on kitchen paper.

Heat the smoke mix in a wok, or large pan, and get it smoking heavily – so heavy that it stains the walls yellow. Shake it around so that it’s smoking evenly.

Place the cured salmon on a lightly oiled wire rack and drop this over the billowing smoke. Whack another wok or bowl that snuggly fits the diameter of the smoking wok on top to seal. Keep the heat on high.

Apart from adding a smoky taste, hot smoking is also about cooking the produce, too. For a 150g piece of salmon, you’ll need to leave it for a good 5 minutes.

Remove the salmon from the wok and let it cool down completely. Then wrap in clingfilm and refrigerate for at least 8 hours. Initially, salmon hot-smoked this way tastes like the first time you drank used engine oil – the first cup actually makes you suck your gums back (apologies Ade Edmonson)! Chilling it allows the astringencies to die down and the overall taste is far more pleasant.

When you’re ready to use it, break the hot-smoked salmon into small chunks.

Let’s build a battleship!

Portion your prepared sushi rice into about 30g balls and mould these into oval shapes, about 1–1.5cm tall. Wrap the nori strips around the rice, creating the hulls of the ship (see the picture ). Now it’s time to fill ’er up, sailor.

Poke a generous amount of broken up smoked salmon into the hull. Add a couple of generous squirts of the yuzu kosho mayo, one starboard, one port side of your battleship (newbies, these are not cooking terms but nautical terms – don’t go asking fellow foodies if they dress their sea bass on the starboard side!).

Decorate with the takuan and the garlic crisps. Eat now. Don’t let these hang around for too long after making them – the nori strips will go wrinkly like toes in the bath.



Tea-Smoked Salmon Gunkan and Yuzu Kosho Mayo

SPICY TUNA MAKI ROLL

First up, what’s maki? Essentially it’s rolled sushi, usually with nori (seaweed) and rice rolled around different fillings.

Too often I experience ‘spicy tuna’ in maki form or even tartare, etc., and it really isn’t spicy at all. What’s the point? Ok, let’s not totally kill the flavour of the tuna unless you are attempting to use that bright pink, gas-infused shit that is looming in giant freezer warehouses worldwide. In which case it has no flavour anyway – go crazy with distracting accompaniments.

Generally, you’re looking for a deeper red colour when purchasing tuna – this being its natural colour and most likely offering a better depth of flavour. If somebody tries selling you bright pink, almost translucent tuna beat them with it. (Not sure I can/should say that?)

So, this spicy tuna filling is spicy – it’s not OTT spicy, but is good enough to get the title spicy without being too spicy for the tuna. If you like it spicier, don’t add more of the sauce, spice it with some Blair’s 3am Reserve Hot Sauce – that shit will kick your ass into next week. Be super-careful with it though; no matter how well you think you can handle chilli, this will take you down. We do a roulette maki with it in the restaurant; we cut the maki into six pieces and one of them gets a tiny dab of the 3am sauce – pain ensues.

MAKES 1 ROLL

100g prepared sushi rice

1 sheet nori, about 15 x 9cm

35–50ml spicy Korean miso , plus extra for drizzling

120g best-quality yellow fin tuna, sinew removed and cut into approx. 1mm dice (blue fin is fine too, so long as it’s from sustainable stock)

tempura crunchies (quadruple the quantity of batter to give you enough for the maki)

To serve

2 lengths spring onion, green and white part, finely sliced, washed and dried

black and white sesame seeds

a few chives, chopped

Blair’s 3am Reserve Hot Sauce, optional

Equipment

sushi mat

This is an uramaki-style roll which means it’s inside out. Whenever you make an inside out roll, you need to tightly wrap your sushi mat in clingfilm. Here’s a sweet tip for you: to make sure the clingfilm stays in place, grab your hairdryer and, once wrapped, give the clingfilm a full-on blast on a high setting. This will stick the clingfilm to the sushi mat.

Once you’ve wrapped your sushi mat in clingfilm you’re ready to go. Using wet fingers, press your sushi rice into the nori sheet, spreading it evenly and leaving a 1cm border at the top edge. Flip the sheet over so that the nori faces upwards and the rice is touching your clingfilm.

Mix the spicy Korean miso, to taste, with the diced tuna. Make a thick line of it along the nori, about 1.5cm away from the edge closest to you. Lift the edge over the tuna mix and start to form a roll. Press firmly with the mat and try to use your fingers to press it evenly and manipulate it into a square shape.

Once it’s square-ish, press all 4 sides of the maki roll so that it is firm and not in danger of falling apart when you go to slice it.

Make the tempura crunchies as instructed. (Depending on the size of your crunchies you might need to break them up a bit so they’re not too big.) Roll the maki in the crunchies, make sure you apply pressure and cover all parts of the maki.

Slice the maki, using a lightly dampened blade, into 6 pieces. To serve up, drizzle with some extra spicy Korean miso, a scattering of spring onions, black and white sesame seeds, chopped chives, and, if you want to test how many schouilles of chilli you can handle, a tiny dot of Blair’s 3am Sauce on 1 or more of the pieces.



Spicy Tuna Maki Roll

SALMON GRAVADLAX MAKI IN DILL MAYO

Gravadlax – yep, the Swedish classic. But this is sushi you say? No, I tell you, this is one of sushi’s fucked up friends. Purists will tell you how this offends them, how it breaks their arbitrary rules and that it instigates heated discussions amongst hard-working sushi chefs who spend their days otherwise playing golf, spinning their wheels and churning out perfectly honed mounds of glum – just like their grey personalities. Tradition has a place of course, but we shouldn’t get hung up on it. Gravadlax is a tradition too, and in my opinion is an obvious preparation for sushi, err, sorry, maki.

This is a favourite of mine, see what you think…

MAKES 1 ROLL

80g gravadlax salmon cure (see below)

100g salmon fillet, skinless and boneless

a large bunch of dill, roughly chopped, plus extra to decorate

1 sheet nori, about 15cm x 9cm

100g prepared sushi rice

15g cucumber batons, deseeded, or avocado wedges

20g yuzu kosho mayo , mixed with a large pinch of chopped dill

puffed soba

For the gravadlax salmon cure

50g fine sea salt

50g caster sugar

a decent pinch of ground white pepper

a decent pinch of shichimi togarashi

finely grated zest of ½ lemon

1 medium-sized beetroot, grated (this is messy shit – wear gloves, rubber ones, not your aunt’s white cotton driving gloves)

Equipment

sushi mat

To make the gravadlax salmon, blend all the ingredients for the cure until fine and keep refrigerated until required.

Lay out a double layer of clingfilm – it needs to be big enough to accommodate your slab of salmon and be able to wrap it up as well. Spread a large dollop of the cure mix onto the clingfilm, place the salmon on top and rub the remaining cure mix over the top of the salmon. Fold the clingfilm up and around the salmon so that it is as tightly wrapped as possible; wrap some more clingfilm around it if necessary. Get it into the fridge for 1 hour to marinate. (You might need to give it longer, another hour or so, if you have a very large chunk of salmon from the head end of the fish.)

When the time is up, unwrap and wipe off the marinade. Lightly rinse under cold water and dry very well using kitchen paper. Grab the chopped dill, and then roll the salmon in it. Wrap once again in clingfilm and refrigerate for at least 30 minutes before using. This keeps well for a day; it’s possible to keep longer, but it’s not going to be at its best.

Wrap your sushi mat in clingfilm (see here for my top tip).

Have ready a small bowl of cold water to keep your hands moist and the rice from sticking. Put the nori sheet on top of your sushi mat. Now you need to spin your nori sheet around from how you normally roll a maki so that it’s more portrait than landscape.

Using wet fingers, press your sushi rice firmly into the nori sheet, spreading it evenly and leaving a 1cm border at the top edge. Flip the rice sheet over so that the maki faces upwards and the rice is touching your sushi mat. Before cutting your strips of gravadlax to go in the centre of the maki, cut some thin slices across the face of the fillet so that it looks like thin strips of sashimi – set these to one side and use the rest of the salmon to fill the maki, along with the cucumber or avocado. Starting from the bottom end (the end closest to you), and, using both hands, start rolling the nori sheet tightly ensuring that the fillings don’t pop out the sides and that they remain central once you reach the 1cm nori lip. With the sushi mat on the outside of the maki, use small amounts of even pressure to ensure all parts of the maki are nice and tight. Unravel the maki from the mat, and layer the reserved slices of the gravadlax over your maki roll, so that they overlap. Cut into 6 pieces.

Top each piece with a small dollop of the mayo, some puffed soba and some chopped dill. (Don’t serve soy sauce with this, it’s flavoursome enough and has its own sauce already.)



Salmon Gravadlax Maki in Dill Mayo

SOFT- SHELL CRAB TEMPURA MAKI WITH KIMCHI

There must be hundreds of different versions of this maki worldwide. I always order a soft-shell maki if I see it on a menu, I’m a kind of fan. Sometimes these rolls are described as spider rolls: WTF? Something about that name pisses me off. I’m not exactly sure what it is about it that is such a wind-up. I’ll have somebody assess my brain one day and the truth will be known – it might be such a dull reason that it’s just not worth repeating or even tweeting. I suppose this name isn’t so bad compared to what should be crowned as the world’s most ridiculously named sushi – the ‘fashion sandwich’ from South Africa. Can you imagine coming up with that name and then having the balls to tell somebody that you’re going to unleash a new dish called the fashion sandwich? Unless it was a comedian I can’t see how it could be taken seriously – a prank gone wrong perhaps? Surely it has nothing to do with fashion in the original sense of the word. Anyway, back to my soft-shell crab roll, without the silly title.

MAKES 1 ROLL

45g soft-shell crab (about ½ crab, cooked weight)

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

20g tempura flour, for coating

200ml trisol batter

1 sheet nori, about 15cm x 9cm

For the maki filling

100g prepared sushi rice

15g kimchi mayo

6 cucumber batons, deseeded

3 avocado wedges

To serve

25g kimchi pickle

kimchi mayo

1 tablespoon chopped chives

Equipment

sushi mat

First, make sure your crab is well drained. Wrap it in multiple layers of kitchen paper and gently press any excess water out of it.

Heat the oil in a fryer or large pan to 180°C/350°F. Toss the crab in tempura flour to lightly coat then drop into the hot oil and fry for 4 minutes. Be careful as this will create small explosions and spit hot oil at you. Remove the tempura crab from the oil, using a perforated spoon, drain on a wire rack and cool to room temperature.

Keep your oil at 180°C/350°F. Cut the just-fried crab into 6 even pieces, then dip each piece into the trisol batter and fry again, this time for about 1½ minutes. You will now have some seriously moisty-moist yet damn crunchy crab. Remove, set it aside and you’re ready to roll in to your maki.

Wrap your sushi mat in clingfilm (see here for my top tip). Gather all of your maki filling ingredients, plus a small bowl of cold water to keep your hands moist and the rice from sticking to them. Put the nori sheet on top of your clingfilm-wrapped sushi mat. Now you need to spin your nori sheet around from how you normally roll a maki so that it’s more portrait than landscape.

Using wet fingers, press your sushi rice firmly into the nori sheet, spreading it evenly and leaving a 1cm border at the top edge. Flip the rice sheet over so that the nori faces upwards and the rice is touching your sushi mat. Spread or squirt over a small line of kimchi mayo. Top as evenly as possible with the cucumber, avocado and crunchy crab. To close up, start from the bottom end (the end closest to you), and, using both hands, start rolling the maki tightly ensuring that the fillings don’t pop out the sides and that they remain central once you reach the 1cm nori lip. With the sushi mat on the outside of the maki, use small amounts of even pressure to ensure all parts of the maki are nice and tight. Unravel the maki from the mat and cut into 6 pieces.

Serve up with some kimchi on the side and a drizzle of kimchi mayo and some chopped chives over the top.



Soft-Shell Crab Tempura Maki with Kimchi

SCORCHED WAGYU ROLL TOPPED WITH CHICKEN LIVER PARFAIT AND YUZU MARMALADE

Purists and snobs of both French and Japanese cuisines would probably crap themselves at the thought of hooking these two dishes together. The initial idea is a total rip-off of Tournedos Rossini – a classic French steak and foie gras dish. Rossini was a well-known eighteenth-century Italian composer who was mates with French culinary master Marie-Antoine Carême. Some say that Carême came up with this for Rossini and simply named it after him. Another version suggests that Rossini came up with it himself after his foie gras appetiser and main course steak showed up at the table at the same time, and he simply slid one on top of the other.

There’s no foie gras in this recipe – I’ve switched it up for a very creamy chicken liver parfait. Stupidly extravagant and way over the top, I’d like to crown this roll the heavyweight champion of the nouveau-riche sushi – worldwide!

The marmalade makes more than needed for the recipe so serve leftovers with sautéed lobster and chillies with some lemon, or it’s great with vanilla ice cream.

MAKES 6 PIECES

60g Wagyu slider mix (see here , and scale down quantities as necessary)

light olive oil, for frying

1 spring onion, sliced into thin rounds, washed in cold water and drained

sesame seeds, to serve

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

For the yuzu marmalade

100g grated yuzu zest (frozen or fresh)

90ml fresh lemon juice

40ml orange juice

40g caster sugar

3g powdered pectin, mixed with a little lukewarm water to form a paste

1 teaspoon yuzu juice

1 teaspoon liquid glucose, optional

For the chicken liver parfait

300ml port

2 cloves garlic, crushed

50g shallots, peeled and thinly sliced

300g chicken livers, trimmed of sinew, rinsed and drained

2 eggs

300g salted butter, melted and clarified, plus extra to top

a pinch of sea salt and ground white pepper

For the sushi roll

20g cucumber batons

30ml amazu, chilled (see here )

1 sheet nori

100g prepared sushi rice , at room temperature

5g wasabi paste (fresh is best, rehydrated, good-quality powdered is quite suitable but the cheap, bright green tube-stuff is total crap)

For the yuzu marmalade-miso sauce

50ml den miso

1 tablespoon rice vinegar

½ teaspoon Japanese mustard powder, mixed with a little water to form a wet paste

2 tablespoons yuzu marmalade

Equipment

sushi mat

The marmalade, chicken liver parfait and burgers could easily be made a day or so ahead if you want to be prepared.

Make the yuzu marmalade by mixing the ingredients, except the yuzu juice and glucose, in a pan. Heat until lightly bubbling but don’t let it boil. Remove from the heat and leave to cool to room temperature, then stir through the yuzu juice. Taste – if you find it is too sharp, add the liquid glucose. The marmalade keeps well in the fridge for 1 month in a sterilised jar, but serve it at room temperature.

To make the chicken liver parfait, combine the port, garlic and shallots and simmer over a medium heat until reduced by two-thirds. Strain and then allow to cool to room temperature, which should take about 20 minutes.

Preheat the oven to around 110°C/90°C fan/Gas Mark ¼.

Blend the chicken livers on a high speed for 1 minute in a blender, slowly add the eggs, then trickle in the port reduction and season with sea salt and white pepper.

With the motor still running on a steady speed, slowly pour the warm clarified butter into the liver mixture so that it emulsifies.

Pour the chicken liver mixture into a small terrine mould or individual ramekins, and put the mould or ramekins in a roasting tray. Pour hot water into the roasting tray, using enough to come at least halfway up the sides of the moulds or ramekins. Bake in the oven in your water bath for 1½ hours.

Remove the parfait from the oven and allow to cool for 1 hour. Once it’s at room temperature, pour over a thin layer of lukewarm clarified butter and then chilli in the fridge for 2 or 3 hours before use. (This recipe will make more than you need, but the layer of clarified butter will help preserve the parfait in the fridge for a week or so.)

Soak the cucumber batons in the cold amazu for 1 hour. Set aside.

Next, combine the ingredients for the Wagyu mini-burgers according to the recipe here . Then, with clean hands, divide the mix into six 10g piles. Lightly moisten your hands and shape each pile into mini-burger shapes. Cover with clingfilm and refrigerate for at least 20 minutes prior to cooking. You are ready to roll…

Heat a non-stick frying pan, season your mini Wagyu sliders/burgers with a little sea salt and freshly ground black pepper. Add a splash of olive oil to the pan, and fry the burgers over a high heat for about 1½ minutes on each side. The result should see a well-browned exterior with a pink centre. Keep warm.

Next maki the maki roll. Wrap your sushi mat in clingfilm (see here for my top tip), gather your nori sheet, sushi rice and wasabi, and drain your pickled cucumber batons.

Place the nori sheet onto the plastic wrapped sushi mat. Lightly dampen your hands – rub together with a little water so that you have a light, even coating of water all over your hands/fingers – and then press the sushi rice evenly over the entire sheet of nori, leaving a gap of about 8mm at the top end (furthest from you). Flip it over so that the nori is facing upwards.

Drain off any excess pickling liquid from the cucumbers by letting them sit on some kitchen paper for 1 minute, then place them evenly in the centre of the nori. Take the wasabi with your index finger and do a long, even as possible, swoosh along the exposed nori nearest to you, below the cucumber. Roll it up, press the roll firmly whilst inside the mat to ensure everything is sticking and it won’t fall apart. Cut into 6 pieces.

Quickly mix together the ingredients for the marmalade-miso sauce.

Top each maki piece with a burger, a small teaspoon of the chicken liver parfait, a pinch of spring onion, a scattering of sesame seeds and some random splashings of the yuzu marmalade-miso sauce. (You could just serve the sauce in a dipping cup on the side if you’re not feeling too artistic.)



Scorched Wagyu Roll Topped with Chicken Liver Parfait and Yuzu Marmalade



FRIED CHICKEN MAKI WITH UMAMI MAYO AND CHILLI PONZU

So I was working in Dubai, setting up this posh Japanese joint and our manager, no, hold on, ‘director’ (who was fresh out of Make-a-Manager School) had a thing for fried food with a triple side of mayo. As a total piss-take I made him a fried chicken maki, he loved it and didn’t see my sarcastic maki as a piss-take, but wanted more. Animal, I thought. This didn’t satisfy me so I had to do one worse. A day or so later it was lasagne for the staff meal – yep, lasagne maki. He was dubious, but, like a hesitant stray cat he drew himself closer, sniffed, then went for the kill! I gave up after that, I figured this guy would eat anything around and I couldn’t think of anything more fucked up than lasagne in a maki.

Anyway, the chicken maki turned out to be pretty decent. Here’s a version…

MAKES 1 ROLL

1 sheet nori

2 pieces fried chicken (see here ), cut into strips

100g prepared sushi rice

2 teaspoons umami mayo , plus extra to serve

For the chilli ponzu dipping sauce

1 red chilli, roughly chopped (choose something scorching hot)

80ml ponzu sauce

1 teaspoon lime juice

a pinch of chopped spring onion

To serve

1 tablespoon chopped, washed and dried spring onion

6 thin slices red chilli

Equipment

sushi mat

First make the chilli ponzu dipping sauce. Mix all the ingredients together and steep at room temperature for 1 day. Refrigerate until required.

To make the maki, lay the nori sheet onto a sushi mat layered with a sheet of clingfilm. With damp hands, press the prepared sushi rice onto the nori and spread it evenly across the top of the sheet. Flip it over so the nori is now facing up.

Lay 1cm-thick strips of the fried chicken along the top of the nori sheet, leaving a gap of about 1.5cm from the edge closest to you. Squirt a thin stream of umami mayo next to the chicken.

Roll up the nori and press firmly to ensure all is being held in place.

With a damp, thin blade, cut the maki into 6 even pieces and serve up. Drizzle over some more umami mayo, decorate with the spring onion and chilli, and serve with the chilli ponzu on the side as a dip.



Fried Chicken Maki with Umami Mayo and Chilli Ponzu

TORCHED SALMON NIGIRI WITH BÉARNAISE SALSA AND SKINNY FRIES

Steak frites with either Café de Paris butter or béarnaise sauce – or, fuck it, both – is my kind of last supper meal. I can’t avoid it if it’s on any menu, even if I know that it’s going to be totally shit, even if I can see the chef out the front of the restaurant having a smoke. It draws me in … I’m powerless. I wanted to do a Japanese version, but I wasn’t ever happy enough with the results. It wasn’t Japanese enough. Then one day this little cracker made its way into my brain (or as my mate Rob used to call his – ‘my ideas factory’).

MAKES 3 NIGIRI

1 potato, good for chipping

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

90g prepared sushi rice

3 slices, or 35g, salmon, sliced long and thin

¾ teaspoon yuzu-truffle-egg sauce

chopped chives, to serve

For the béarnaise salsa

3 small red shallots

5 whole black peppercorns

1 tablespoon chopped tarragon

120ml red wine vinegar

80ml sake

½ garlic clove, crushed

For the salsa, heat all the ingredients in a pan over a medium heat and allow to reduce until almost dry. Set aside to cool. Then, using a knife, chop the salsa until fine and well combined. Chill in the fridge until you’re ready to serve it up.

For the skinny fries, cut the potato into super-thin skinny fries. Heat the oil in a fryer or large pan to 140°C/275°F and cook the chips until golden. Remove with a perforated scoop, drain well, and then crank up the oil to 180°C/350°F. Drop the fries back in to the oil to crunch ’em up, until golden and crunchy. Remove and drain on kitchen paper.

Divide the sushi rice into 3 and, using damp hands, shape the balls into rectangular pillows.

One by one, lay a slice of salmon over the rice pillows (sounds stupid I know, putting your salmon to bed). Then, with freshly dampened hands, use one hand to press the salmon onto the rice whilst holding the base in your other hand. Now shape it to fit over the sides, so that it looks nice and neat and rounded at the sides. Repeat with the remaining 2 nigiri.

Top with a good dollop of the yuzu-truffle-egg sauce, the béarnaise salsa, a sprinkling of chopped chives and, of course, a few skinny fries.



Torched Salmon Nigiri with Béarnaise Salsa and Skinny Fries

PICKLED LANGOUSTINE NIGIRI WITH GREEN CHILLI

This is kind of a nigiri, kind of not. But like the title of this chapter states, these are all sushi’s fucked up friends. Nothing pure or too normal about some of them, but they have what it takes to taste fucking great – and I’m using properly seasoned sushi rice so I class them as sushi. This one is basically a ball of rice with a lightly pickled langoustine formed around it. Ideally, it gets a torching from a pipe-bending plumber’s strength blowtorch.

MAKES 4 NIGIRI

4 langoustine tails, shell, tail and vein removed

160ml nanban zuke base

60g prepared sushi rice

To serve

2 teaspoons green chilli dressing or chilli-miso-truffle sauce

4 hot green chilli slices (as hot as you like)

4 mizuna leaves, to garnish

Equipment

blowtorch

Marinate the langoustines in the nanban zuke base for 15 minutes. Remove and drain well, then refrigerate for a further 15 minutes before using.

With lightly moistened hands, roll four 15g balls with the sushi rice. Don’t compress them too much – just enough to hold together.

Shape the langoustine tails around the rice balls and apply more pressure this time so that they hold well. Now it’s torch time…

You should have quick, fierce blasts of heat here; a weak household grade blowtorch will cause the langoustine to start cooking by the time you get the colour – and getting colour is what we’re after here. I use a seriously large plumber’s torch, which means I can give it quick blasts for colour without cooking it.

Drizzle with your chosen sauce and garnish with a slice of chilli and a mizuna leaf.



Pickled Langoustine Nigiri with Green Chilli

CHIVE OMELETTE NIGIRI TOPPED WITH FRESH TRUFFLE SHAVINGS

Tamago-yaki can be pretty special if done well. But it takes a fair bit of practice and unless you’re being served by a master of it, you may just be eating two-day-old cold egg omelette. One of the best versions, in my opinion, is made with pounded shrimp and it’s fairly sweet. Traditionally, the egg mixture would be cooked in layers using a square copper pan. It would be added a ladleful at a time, allowed to cook and then rolled up to the back of the pan, then the next ladle would go in until you had a full pan of cooked tamago-yaki. It takes ages and this method is not only quicker but you can do it in much smaller quantities. Fresh is best, yo.

MAKES 5 NIGIRI

For the omelette

50g peeled and deveined tiger prawns

2 eggs (really fucking good ones, make an effort), whisked

30ml dashi

15ml mirin

½ tablespoon light soy sauce

a pinch of flaked sea salt

10g caster sugar

1 tablespoon chopped chives

a few drops of white truffle oil

grapeseed oil, for greasing

For the nigiri

150g prepared sushi rice

1 sheet nori, cut into 5 × 6–7cm strips

10g truffle shavings, fresh only or don’t bother

Pound or blend the prawns until you have a tight purée. Whisk the eggs with all the other ingredients except the oil, and mix in the prawn purée. Cover with clingfilm and refrigerate for a minimum of 1 hour or a maximum of overnight. This allows the air bubbles to disappear and the prawn flavour to develop.

So, time to cook.

The best scenario is to use a really wide frying pan. Set it over a medium heat and lightly oil it with some grapeseed oil. Move the oil around the pan, then, using kitchen paper, wipe the pan – it shouldn’t be totally dry, but there should just be a thin layer of oil.

Pour in a layer of the egg and allow it to set, which should happen almost immediately. Remove from the heat and, using an angled spatula, roll up the omelette into a cigar shape and slide it out of the pan onto a plate to cool. (If you have extra egg left over make another omelette.) Refrigerate the omelettes for 35 minutes or so.

Once cooled, cut the omelette on an acute angle so that you get an 8cm or so long slice.

Divide the sushi rice into 5 and, with damp hands, shape the balls into rectangles. Lay each omelette slice over a rice pillow and with dampened hands gently press the omelette onto the rice.

Strap the omelette to the rice using a strip of nori, shave over some fresh truffle and serve.



Chive Omelette Nigiri Topped with Fresh Truffle Shavings

MISO GRILLED FOIE GRAS NIGIRI WITH GREEN APPLE OROSHI

Foie gras – touchy subject to some and that’s fair enough. Some foie gras birds do get reared poorly but so do chickens and pigs and so on. I think it’s a matter of sourcing the most ethically treated, well-reared meats that you can.

I’ve visited foie gras farmers in France who care for their birds, which are free-range and live in the most incredible pristine hills. I wrote a book about foie gras once, talk about niche! I’ve eaten some fantastic foie gras over the years but this method for pan-frying it destroys them all. It adds a shit-ton of umami, and an element of sugar and mirin which helps the foie gras to caramelise beautifully.

So, on to the miso part. Marinating things in miso sauce can be seriously brilliant. The famous Japanese black cod dish is simply black cod in miso sauce and soaked for three days. However, not everything works in my opinion. Salmon, for example, doesn’t have enough fat unless you’re using the belly, and then it is insanely good. Foie gras is pretty much all fat, so miso sauce won’t be drying it out too easily.

Miso and foie gras 4eva!

MAKES 5 NIGIRI

100g slice of foie gras, approx. 1–1. 5cm thick

30–40ml den miso , or just enough to cover

150g prepared sushi rice

drizzle olive oil

1 sheet nori, cut into 5 x6cm-long strips

sea salt and freshly ground black pepper

To serve

2 teaspoons unagi sauce

puffed soba

½ Granny Smith apple

5 slices cucumber, cut on an angle if you’re fancy

Combine the foie gras with the den miso and refrigerate, covered, for 18–24 hours.

When you’re ready to begin making your sushi, divide the rice into 5 equal-sized balls and then shape into rectangular blocks.

Heat a heavy non-stick pan until almost smoking and then drip in a tiny amount of olive oil in and tilt the pan to spread the oil around.

Season the foie gras lightly with some sea salt and freshly ground black pepper on both sides (I fucking hate chefs who are too lazy to season anything on both sides). Pan-fry the foie gras on one side for approximately 1 minute, until well caramelised. Flip it over and cook the other side for 45 seconds–1 minute. You need the colouring process to happen fast – the foie gras will burn if it sits there for too long and cooking it at a lower temperature will overcook it.

Remove the foie gras and rest on a warm plate in a warm place for 2 minutes – it should be soft and molten inside, perfect.

Slice it on an angle and place each slice over a block of the shaped rice. Strap it in place using a strip of nori.

Drizzle with some unagi sauce, top with some puffed soba and freshly grated apple (you want to grate the apple just before you’re going to use it or it will discolour). Serve on some cucumber slices and consume it quickly.



Miso Grilled Foie Gras Nigiri with Green Apple Oroshi

DASHI POACHED VEAL NIGIRI WITH ANCHOVY MAYO

This is a version of the fantastic Piedmontese dish, vitello tonnato . I’ve come across a few different variations for what is essentially roasted or braised veal with a kind of tuna mayo. It can be dressed with capers, anchovies and cayenne pepper too, and that’s what I’ve done here. I leave the veal fillet to slowly poach in lots of dashi, away from direct heat, then chill, slice and shape the nigiri. The must-have toppings are fried capers and anchovy mayo.

Certainly it’s a massive shift from the norm when it comes to nigiri but if it works, then who gives a shit really. I used to take a far more traditional or ‘correct’ stance myself, but how could anything ever develop if we all thought this way?

You’re better off cooking more veal than you need, and it needs to be the weight suggested below so that overcooking doesn’t occur, but we all love to eat the trimmings – lots of trimmings.

MAKES 5 NIGIRI

200g veal fillet

1 litre dashi

5cm piece kombu

100ml light soy sauce

5 salted capers

rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

150g prepared sushi rice

black and white sesame seeds, to serve

For the anchovy mayo

100g mayonnaise

35g anchovies in olive oil

3 teaspoons lemon juice

1 teaspoon yuzu juice

2 garlic cloves, finely chopped

Cut the veal fillet lengthways in half then estimate your 200g rectangular ‘log’ and portion it off.

Heat the dashi, kombu and light soy sauce in a saucepan to come up to 90°C/195°F, and maintain this temperature for 5 minutes.

Remove from the heat and allow the temperature to drop to 75°C/170°F, then drop in your 200g veal ‘log’. Keep your pan off the heat. Set a timer for 20 minutes then remove the veal. Take a slice off one end – it ought to be rose pink. Return the veal into the dashi-soy mixture to cool for 30–40 minutes until completely cold, then refrigerate.

While the veal is chilling, make the anchovy mayo by blending all the ingredients until super-fine. Chill until required.

When the veal is chilled, slice it on an angle so that you have five 6cm-long slices.

Rinse the capers to remove the salt and then pat them completely dry. Heat the oil in a fryer or large pan to 180°C/350°F. Deep-fry for 1 minute, until crunchy. Remove with a perforated scoop and drain on kitchen paper. Store in a warm dry place until you need them.

Divide the sushi rice into 5 balls and, with damp hands, shape them into rectangular pillows.

One by one, lay a slice of veal over each the rice pillow. With freshly dampened hands, press the veal slice onto the rice whilst holding the base in your other hand. Now shape it to fit over the sides, so that it looks nice and neat and rounded at the sides. Repeat with the other 4 nigiri.

Top with a small dollop of the anchovy mayo, some sesame seeds and a fried caper. No extra soy sauce on the side is necessary with this, but a little extra anchovy mayo never hurts…



Dashi Poached Veal Nigiri with Anchovy Mayo

CRUNCHY TEMAKI CONES

Temaki is the variety of sushi which gets wrapped up like an ice cream cone. Essentially, these cones get dehydrated with mirin so they become extra crunchy and remain crunchier a little longer. It’s a pretty sweet idea and it hails from my mate Maru, a fellow Japanese chef here in London. I’ve made mini cones here but you could just as easily do larger ones, just dry them out for a little longer.

Fill these with whatever you like – spicy tuna tartar, chunky avocado, gravadlax, salmon and dill mayo or fried soft shell crab, or have a go at the king crab in yuzu kosho mayo as below. They’re best eaten immediately after filling so that the nori still has a bit of crunch and hasn’t become soggy and a little chewy.

MAKES 6 MINI CONES (YOU MIGHT HAVE A BIT OF FILLING LEFT OVER)

3 sheets nori, cut in half diagonally to make 6 triangles in total

15ml mirin, for brushing

For the king crab filling

60g cooked king crab, cut into chunks (no worries if you don’t have king crab – chose your preferred crab instead)

25g yuzu kosho mayo

1 teaspoon lime juice

2 teaspoons chopped chives

2 teaspoons finely chopped red onion

a tiny pinch of sea salt

1–2 grinds of freshly ground black pepper

Equipment

6 metal pastry cones – try to find Teflon ones or wrap your aluminium ones in parchment paper first

Brush the nori sheets liberally with mirin, then shape each wet nori sheet around a cone to fashion a nori-shaped cone. Place these in a dehydrator overnight for a good 8–12 hours, until they are properly crunchy. No dehydrator? Try doing this in your oven at it’s lowest setting (around 70°C/50°C fan/Gas Mark very low) for 5–6 hours.

Store the cones in an airtight container. Tip: purchase some silica gel online and pour a layer of this into the bottom of your container. Place a sheet of parchment over the top of this, then store your cones on top of the parchment – the gel will eat up the moisture and leave your cones super-crunchy.

When you’re nearly ready to serve, mix together the crab filling ingredients and fill your cones with a little almost overflowing. Serve right away and enjoy the crunch.



Crunchy Temaki Cones

CHIRASHI SUSHI BITES

Chirashi sushi is, simply put, various ingredients – usually sashimi, ikura (salmon roe) or omelette – served on top of slightly warm, seasoned sushi rice. It’s one of the true joys I’ve come across at Tskuji, Tokyo’s famous fish market. Rock up at 4am and get ready for a breakfast like no other, large beer and some mind-blowing, yet-to-be refrigerated fish on warm, ultra-fresh sushi rice. I’ve never had fish so flavoursome, so fresh, so firm yet creamy. This was one of the most incredible food experiences for me ever! All self-proclaimed foodies – you haven’t tasted the real deal until you’ve been to Tskuji, make it your next holiday; you’ll not be disappointed and you’ll most certainly be humbled.

Although this is one hell of a dish, it wouldn’t work on a Kurobuta menu. We serve smaller dishes, tapas style, and a bowl of chirashi is almost a meal in itself. We started to play around with a mini version of chirashi in another restaurant I worked in. Our talented head sushi chef, Maru, came up with a killer version, which we called ‘chirashi bites’. This is a version of that. Want to do a sushi-based snack or dish to impress your friends but can’t be arsed messing about with sushi or always fuck it up? Then this is for you.

Note that the below is just a basic topping, but you could go apeshit and add: sushi omelette, crispy leeks, sea bass sashimi, spring onion, blindingly ripe and eye-wateringly tasty cherry tomatoes, sesame seeds, sea urchin and scallops. The list goes on…

MAKE AS MANY AS YOU LIKE, PER PIECE YOU’LL NEED THE FOLLOWING:

1 baby gem lettuce leaf

½ heaped tablespoon freshly made, still warm sushi rice

For the topping

1 x 7g slice salmon sashimi

1 x 7g slice tuna sashimi

½ teaspoon ikura (salmon roe) (insider’s tip – marinate briefly in a 1:1 solution of soy sauce and mirin)

1 x 7g slice yellowtail sashimi

½ small leek, cut into thin strips and quickly fried

For the nikiri shoyu (this is what I serve if somebody asks for soy), to serve

4 parts dark soy sauce

1 part sake

1 part mirin

Mix the nikiri shoyu together according to how much you want to make. Next, simply put the warm rice on the baby gem leaf, add the toppings, and drizzle with the nikiri shoyu. Serve immediately, whilst it’s still warm, or this won’t be anywhere near as nice as it should be.



Chirashi Sushi Bites