JUNK FOOD JAPAN



TUNA SASHIMI PIZZA

I have my friend Ahmed Almoayed to thank for this one. Ahmed has a happening Japanese joint in Bahrain called Mirai, in fact I used to work for him, and often still do some consultancy out there for him. He once mentioned that he had heard about somebody doing this in the States and wanted me to develop it for Mirai. I thought, this can’t be good – how on earth can I make this taste good, it’s such cheesy Americanised junk. So I messed about with it and left him with a version. As we were opening the Kurobuta pop-up in Chelsea, I remembered the pizza and Junk Food Japan was born! How do I feel about it now? It’s a guilty pleasure, and I love it! If you’re not keen on tuna, do the exact same recipe with slices of avocado, or try it with salmon if tuna ain’t your thang!

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU (1 PIZZA IS GOOD FOR 2 AS A FATTY SNACK OR AS PART OF A KUROBUTA FEAST)

1 soft tortilla wrap (not the big thick one; the thinner the better)

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

64g fresh tuna, or 8 sashimi slices (you should have two 8–10g sashimi slices per pizza ‘quarter’)

¼ red onion, finely diced

½ green chilli, finely diced

2 teaspoons wasabi tobiko (fish roe)

black and white sesame seeds, for sprinkling

chopped chives, optional

For the truffle ponzu

100g Japanese Kewpie mayonnaise

20ml ponzu sauce

a few drops of white truffle oil

To make the truffle ponzu, whisk the mayonnaise and ponzu sauce together, season with the truffle oil, and you are ready to rock. Any leftover sauce can be used for salads or tempura or as a dip for raw veg/crudités.

To make a pizza base (of sorts), find a bowl that is around 15cm in diameter and tip it over onto the tortilla, then run a knife around the bowl so that you end up with a 15cm pizza base.

Crank the fryer up to 180°C/350°F. Don’t use the crusty old oil that you left in the pan from the last time you got high and decided to make your own KFC! In your pristine oil, fry the pizza base for between 2 and 3 minutes until crunchy – it will come out looking like it’s had a good old session on a sun bed.

Use metal tongs to remove the base from the oil, drain on kitchen paper and allow to cool briefly. When you think you can take the heat (don’t let it cool down too much as it will break easily), take a bread knife and cut the base evenly into quarters. Place on some kitchen paper and leave in a fairly warm place to drain any excess oil.

To slice the tuna – what a boring explanation that would be, ‘using your right hand as an extension to your soul… blah … blah’. Check the photos, they speak to you.

Right, let’s pizza. Find a sexy plate and arrange your crunchy pizza base in the shape of a, wait for it … pizza! Shock! Give your base a light drizzle with the truffle ponzu, then proceed to drape the tuna slices over so that you cover most of the surface of the base. Top with a scattering of diced onion, chillies, wasabi tobiko and finally the sesame seeds.

Just before you drip this all over your new snakeskin boots, give it another drizzle of the truffle ponzu. One last tip, if you have a sharp knife and you dig chives, finely chop some, and tip all over the pizza.

If the day ever comes I’d like to be buried in a giant pizza box, from Japan of course. Rest in pizza…



Tuna Sashimi Pizza

BARBECUED PORK RIBS WITH STICKY HONEY, SOY AND GINGER GLAZE

No barbecue is complete without ribs. I don’t mean lightweight champions, the lamb ribs, or those caveman-like beef ribs, nor do I mean short ribs or pigeon ribs for that matter. I’m talking PORK! The word rib should be reclassed from a cookery standpoint so it only refers to pork in my view.

This is another great example of how doing some simple prep work the day before your barbecue will pay off.

Rib meat is pretty tough and so to get the best out of them you’ll need to slow cook them and let them cool down in their cooking juices. When it comes to barbecuing, you’ll need to grill them up, cold beer in one hand, tongs in the other, reciting dad jokes to your guests: so cool!

SERVES 4 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE FEAST, OR 2 GREEDY BUGGERS

1kg pork ribs, cut into 7–8 racks

2 tablespoons grapeseed oil, for grilling the ribs

For the master stock

1 whole garlic bulb, cut in half horizontally

6 spring onions

1 large knob of ginger (about 6cm), cut into 3 or 4 chunks

1 long red chilli, cut in half

10cm piece kombu

1 brown onion, cut in half

500ml dark soy sauce

For the soy-mirin glaze

50ml dark soy sauce

50ml mirin

For the honey, soy and ginger glaze

160g liquid honey

35g grated ginger

1 tablespoon dark soy sauce

25g fresh lemon juice

To serve

black and/or white sesame seeds

½ red onion, finely sliced

½ green chilli, finely sliced

To make the stock, put all the ingredients in a large pan with 5 litresof water. Bring to the boil and simmer for 2 hours, skimming off any scum that comes to the surface. Remove from the heat and allow to cool to room temperature.

Rinse the pork ribs and pat dry with kitchen paper. Place the ribs into your room temperature master stock and bring up to a light simmer. Allow to simmer over a medium-high heat for around 1½ hours. The timing will depend on the pork itself, so this is a rough guide; the meat needs to fall away from the bone easily. When done, remove the pan from the heat and allow the ribs to cool to room temperature in the master stock.

Use a slotted spoon to remove the ribs from the stock and transfer to a container or bowl. Cover and refrigerate for 2 hours.

Strain the stock into a large container and chill in the fridge until required. You can keep this base stock for ages (seriously, provided that it is boiled before each use, cooled properly before being refrigerated, you can keep the stock going for months or even years). It also freezes well if you’re a little suspect.

To make the soy-mirin glaze, combine the two ingredients in a spray bottle. To make the honey, soy and ginger glaze, mix all the ingredients well. Set both glazes aside.

Light your barbecue and get it hot.

Lightly oil the ribs and whack ’em on the barbie. We like to barbecue ours over charcoal but you could do them just as well on a solid, cast-iron surface.

Barbecue the ribs until they take on a little colour, spraying with the mirin-soy glaze every 30–40 seconds to allow the ribs to glaze up and get nice and sticky. When shiny hot and smelling fine, remove from the barbecue.

Get that pork on your fork… Drench the cooked ribs in the honey, soy and ginger glaze. Scatter with some sesame seeds and the red onion and green chilli. Now get dirty!



Barbecued Pork Ribs with Sticky Honey, Soy and Ginger Glaze

MISO GRILLED HOT WINGS

I don’t know many people who can say no to a good wing. As with other slightly tougher cuts of meat, I like to slow cook the wings first before giving them some barbecue action. I give the wings a drizzle with some spicy miso sauce while they’re grilling, but you could easily change it up and drizzle them with some sriracha, spray them in mirin and soy, or just keep them plain, served with sea salt and lemon.

SERVES 2 AS PART OF A MULTI-COURSE MENU

20 chicken wings

3 litres master stock , at room temperature

2 tablespoons grapeseed oil, for cooking

For the spicy miso sauce

160g gochujang (fermented chilli paste)

50g Japanese rice vinegar

15ml sake

35g sugar

50ml dashi

25g white miso paste

1 egg yolk

To serve (optional)

lemon wedges

sesame seeds

spring onions

Prepare the chicken wings by removing the tip and disconnecting the centre from the part that looks like a mini drumstick.

Rinse and pat the wings dry with kitchen paper, then place in a large pan with the room temperature stock. Bring up to a simmer and cook for 1½ hours, until the meat becomes soft.

Take off the heat and let the stock cool down to room temperature. Remove the chicken from the stock, cover in clingfilm and refrigerate for at least 1 hour to firm up.

Make up the spicy miso sauce. Mix all the ingredients except the egg yolk in a blender. Put the mix in a saucepan and cook over a very low heat for 15 minutes – do not boil. Cool to room temperature, then whisk in the egg yolk. Chill and keep forever (or until you’re ready to serve).

Time to crank up the barbecue.

Toss the wings in a little oil then get them onto your very hot barbecue. There isn’t a great alternative if you have no barbecue, but if that is the case, then you could use a salamander grill, or, though I haven’t tried this yet, a sandwich press might work.

Get a nice barbecue-scorched colour on the wings and, at that point, drizzle some of the spicy miso sauce over them. Jostle the wings around until the miso starts to caramelise. Get ’em off…

Toss over a little more sauce, then serve up immediately.

Get fancy by squeezing some fresh lemon over the top before eating, and maybe some sesame seeds, too. Go crazy and serve with some lightly grilled spring onions.



Miso Grilled Hot Wings

WAGYU SLIDERS WITH CRUNCHY ONION RINGS AND UMAMI MAYO

I used to look down on chefs or restaurants that would serve burgers. I used to put myself up there, where proper and serious chefs ripped food apart and reformed it as a mousse or even worse – a foam. Like most things in life, there is a time and a place for everything and as far as I’m concerned, both the time and place for foaming shit is a long way behind us – or hibernating in soulless five-star hotels all over the planet.

So, the slider; essentially a mini burger which apparently can simply slide on down your throat. Not sure I know anyone who can perform this trick though. I imagine that when this was first dreamed up its original name was ‘choker’. Anyway, names aside, here is a recipe for the sliders that we serve at Kurobuta. In my opinion, burgers should be kept fairly simple. They need onion, good sauces – you always need two – and a simple bun that isn’t flavoured with shaved buffalo dick. It’s there for texture and to pull the whole thing together. A pickle and a crunch also really help.

I’m absolutely certain there is somebody out there agonising over whether they serve burgers in restaurants in Japan or not. Stereotypically, in your head, no, I guess not. Back here on planet Earth – yes, they do. Jeeezze – does the pope shit in the woods?

These patties could be frozen if you really needed to – I’d suggest that you really don’t – eat up!

MAKES ABOUT 12 PATTIES

For the sliders

425g Wagyu beef (I use striploin)

90g Wagyu fat, trimmed of sinew

40g beef fillet

10g grated ginger

8g transglutaminase powder (aka, meat glue, easily found online for home delivery)

1 egg yolk

10ml light soy sauce

light olive oil, for frying

a big pinch of sea salt, plus extra to season

freshly ground black pepper

For the Japanese barbecue sauce

2 teaspoons light olive oil

2 lengths spring onions, sliced

12 garlic cloves, roughly chopped

5g ginger, peeled and roughly chopped

5g dried chilli flakes

1 green apple, cored and finely chopped

1 tablespoon mirin

2 tablespoons dark soy sauce

1 teaspoon or about 10 hard shakes green Tabasco

10 g white Japanese sesame seeds

2 teaspoons rice vinegar

15g soft brown sugar

8g cornflour, mixed with a little water to make a paste

a pinch of sea salt

a few drops of toasted sesame oil

4 teaspoons fresh lemon juice

For the bun dough

12g fresh yeast

220g plain flour

12g dried milk powder

a pinch of baking powder

a pinch of fine salt

20g caster sugar

25g light olive oil

For the umami mayo

2 egg yolks

3 tablespoons yuzu kosho (yuzu pepper paste)

20g white miso paste

a pinch of katsuobushi (bonito flakes)

45g Japanese rice vinegar

4 garlic cloves

1 tablespoon Dijon mustard

1 teaspoon salted capers, rinsed and patted dry

juice of ½ lemon

150ml olive oil

For the crunchy onion rings

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

1 white onion, cut into about 4mm-thick rings

potato starch, to coat

trisol batter

To serve

quick cucumber pickles

red onion slices

green chilli slices

Equipment

blowtorch

Trim the Wagyu and fat, and the beef fillet of any sinew, then with a big heavy chef’s knife, chop the fat and meat until very fine. Make sure there are no chunks.

Put on some disposable gloves and mix in the rest of the ingredients for the slider, except the olive oil and black pepper, squishing well until all is well incorporated. Form the mixture into little burgers that are about 40g each. Cover with clingfilm and refrigerate for a good hour before cooking.

Next make the barbecue sauce. Add the olive oil to a saucepan along with the spring onions, garlic, ginger and the dried chilli flakes. Sauté over a medium heat for about 10 minutes, until very soft and slightly caramelised.

Add the green apple, mirin, dark soy sauce, Tabasco, sesame seeds, rice vinegar, brown sugar and 50ml of water. Cook again over a medium heat without boiling for 10 minutes and then stir in the cornflour-water mixture. Cook for a further 5 minutes then add the sea salt, sesame oil and lemon juice. Remove from the heat and allow the sauce to cool to room temperature before using.

To make the dough, mix the yeast with 130ml of warm water and set aside.

In a standmixer fitted with the dough attachment, combine all the dry ingredients until well incorporated. On a slow speed, pour in the water-yeast mix gradually. Once incorporated, slowly pour in the oil and mix well. Continue to mix on a medium-high speed for 20 minutes, until the dough appears elastic.

Remove the dough and place in a lightly oiled stainless-steel bowl, cover with clingfilm and keep in a warm place to prove for 30–40 minutes, or until doubled in size.

Lay the dough out on a table and roll it into a long sausage shape, about 4cm in diameter. Cut off 30g chunks and roll them into tight balls by pressing the palm of your hand over the ball and moving your hand in a circular motion – you will feel it taking shape.

You could freeze the dough balls at this stage if you wanted, to keep them for future use, otherwise now’s the time to get your steamer going.

Place the dough balls, evenly spaced, on some baking parchment on a tray that fits your steamer. Clingfilm the tray and allow to prove once again, for about 10–12 minutes, or until doubled in size.

Steam immediately – this takes 10 minutes of full-on steam. Remove, cool down and they’re ready to use.

To make the umami mayo, blitz all the ingredients, except the oil, with 2 tablespoons of warm water until very well incorporated, then very slowly trickle in the oil until thickened and emulsified. If the oil begins to collect around the edge of the mixture and does not appear to be fully emulsified then you’ll need to swiftly pour about 2–4 teaspoons of warm water into the mix – this will help the remaining oil emulsify. Set aside.

Finally, make the crunchy onion rings. Heat the oil in your fryer (or large pan) to 180°C/350°F. Toss the onion rings in potato starch, then dip into the trisol batter. Drop the rings into the hot oil and fry them, in batches if necessary, for 3 minutes, then remove with a perforated spoon. At this stage, the rings will be fairly crunchy. You could put them on a baking tray lined with kitchen paper in a very cool oven if you want to keep them crunchy.

Next, let’s slider…

Heat up a non-stick frying pan, season the Wagyu patties with a little bit of salt and pepper then slip into the pan with a few drops of oil. I like mine rare, so I cook them over a high heat for 1 minute on each side to get a nice browning on them.

Take a blowtorch and torch-toast the steamed buns, top and bottom. Cut the buns in half, splatter with some umami mayo on both inner sides, then layer up on the bottom bun: first the Wagyu patty, top that with a dollop of the Japanese barbecue sauce, then some quick cucumber pickles, a little sliced red onion and sliced green chilli and finally a crunchy onion ring. Put the top on and drive a skewer through the burger to avoid any toppling.



Wagyu Sliders with Crunchy Onion Rings and Umami Mayo

CRUNCHY CHICKEN KARA-AGE BUNS WITH SPICY MAYO AND CUCUMBER PICKLE

Ok, this is some proper junk food – fried chicken in a bun. Still think Japanese food is all about purity? Get to know Japan, even just a little, and you will soon realise that they like to fry chicken just like the rest of us. I’d be surprised to find an izakaya that didn’t feature chicken kara-age. It’s a classic. Dare I mention the Colonel? They embrace his secret recipe chicken, so much so that they now serve beer at KFCs in Japan, so you can soak up your fried goodness with a cool ambery swallow.

MAKES 12 BUNS

3 chicken thighs, skinless and boneless,

potato starch, for coating

1 litre rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

For the chicken kara-mara marinade

1 tablespoon curry power

1 tablespoon cornflour

1 tablespoon plain flour

1½ teaspoons fine salt

1 teaspoon finely ground black pepper

1 teaspoon caster sugar

1 tablespoon Shaoxing wine

1 tablespoon garlic purée

1 tablespoon ginger purée

For the buns

325g bread flour

15g milk powder

2g baking powder

½ teaspoon fine sea salt

30g caster sugar

20g fresh yeast

190ml lukewarm water

35g lard, melted until liquid, or light olive oil

For the spicy mayo

200g Japanese Kewpie mayonnaise

80g sriracha sauce

juice of 1 lime

To serve

iceberg lettuce

green chillies, sliced

quick cucumber pickles , optional

First make the chicken kara-mara marinade by mixing all the ingredients together. Cut each chicken thigh into 4 and rub well with the marinade. Leave for 24 hours, or at the very least, give it a couple of hours.

To make the buns, mix 50ml of warm water with the yeast. Allow the yeast to soften for 3–4 minutes, then whisk in another 140ml of warm water.

Meanwhile, combine the flour, milk powder, baking powder, salt and sugar in the bowl of an electric mixer and use clean dry hands to mix well. With the dough hook attached, set the mixer on a medium speed. Slowly pour the yeast and warm water mixture into the dry mix and mix to combine fully. Ramp up the speed a little and slowly pour in the lard (or light olive oil, which will still give you a pretty good result).

If the mix looks a little too wet – like, if you pick it up and it’s just pure goo – then mix in a little more flour; if it’s too dry then drizzle in some more water. Once it’s looking as it should, slow the mixer back down to a medium speed and let it keep on mixing for 20 minutes.

Lightly grease a stainless steel bowl and tip your well-worked dough in, cover with clingfilm and sit the bowl in a nice warm place to double in size, AKA – grow or rise. Once your dough has doubled, knock it back, or, to put it simply, give it a punch and knock the air out of it. Work it back into a ball, then stretch it out into a long, snake-like shape (more python than green tree snake).

Now, you need to divide the snake up into 30g chunks; use a knife that is crappy and not really loved anymore. Work fast, or the dough will start to rise yet again and we don’t want that just yet.

Next, we are going to roll these chunks into balls. Press the palm of your hand down, firmly, onto one of the chunks, and move it around anticlockwise allowing it to form a ball as you work it. Put the balls onto a deep tray lined with baking parchment.

Once you have finished rolling, you can either freeze your balls until you need them or carry on with the final stages of the process. If you have chosen to freeze them and want to carry on, then simply defrost and crack on with the next instruction. (This recipe makes 20 buns, so you can freeze 8 to use later anyway.)

Position the buns in a warm place, lightly covered with clingfilm, making sure the film isn’t touching the buns (putting them in a lipped, deep tray is best). Once the buns have doubled in size and look light and fluffy, they are ready to be steamed once you’ve assembled all the other components.

Make the mayo by mixing the ingredients together well. Set aside.

Heat the oil in your fryer to 180°C/350°F. Wipe the majority of the marinade from the chicken then coat well in the potato starch. Rub it in really well, adding more potato starch as required. When you think you’ve given it enough, massage it again; there will be a few damp spots and we want to make sure each and every part of the chicken is rubbed with plenty of starch.

Carefully drop the chicken pieces into the hot oil and deep-fry for 4–5 minutes – the thickness of your chicken thighs will determine if it’s more or less. Remove and drain well on a perforated tray or wire rack placed over a baking tray. Fry in batches if necessary.

While the chicken is draining, steam the buns for 10 minutes.

Lets bun…

I always torch the exterior of my buns with a blowtorch (little wonder there’s no hair left on ’em!). This makes them taste toasty and firms them up a little bit – optional but preferable.

Cut your buns through the middle, add a big squirt of the spicy mayo, some iceberg lettuce and sliced green chillies, top with a crunchy chunk of chicken kara-age, then give another squirt of the spicy mayo. Top it off with some more chillies if you’re hungover and need your ass kicked for being so stoopid! I serve pickled cucumbers on the side as they make a good palate cleanser (and I have a pickle fetish). Shove them in the bun, whatever you fancy, they just fit well.



Crunchy Chicken Kara-Age Buns with Spicy Mayo and Cucumber Pickle



FRIED CHICKEN PARTY

‘You can’t compare apples with apples’, where did that saying come from? Well, it doesn’t matter too much, I’m hijacking it. ‘You can’t compare fried chicken with fried chicken.’ It’s like anything I suppose, you get the good and the bad. Fried chicken often cops the bad press, and we probably all think of that silver-haired old fox, the Colonel. You may also think Americana, and why not – where else would you find such a geezer? But this geezer is a global dude and Japan is no exception. In Japan, you can even pre-order your KFC Christmas feast.

Frying chicken isn’t all about Southern-style seasoning and shitty coleslaw on the side. In Japan, plump chunks of marinated chicken are dusted in katakuriko (a kind of potato starch) then fried up and served with a wedge of lemon, some salt or a basic ponzu-type dip – the ultimate beer-drinking snack by the way.

I don’t see why we shouldn’t serve fried chicken in the restaurants; it’s another of those lovely guilty pleasures and you can bet your ass it sells! This is food that shouldn’t be taken too seriously: yes you need to use the best quality free-range, corn-fed and well-reared chicken as possible, but you shouldn’t think this sort of food is beneath your fancy repertoire of recipes you can’t even pronounce properly. Yes, it’s a ‘sometimes food’ and when executed properly it will bring on a devilish cheeky grin that ought to be reserved for other naughtiness.

Throw a fried chicken party and watch the cheeky grins appear from the corner of your friends’ mouths. Party on chicken lovers!

SERVES A PARTY FOR 2

1 whole baby chicken, or poussin (fancy French name, pronounced poo-san, which would be very rude in Japanese)

2 litres master stock

1 egg yolk

100ml single cream

100ml full-cream milk

2 litres rapeseed oil, for deep-frying

For the crunchy fry flour

150g tempura flour

2 tablespoons dried oregano

1 tablespoon dried thyme

1½ tablespoons cayenne pepper

1½ tablespoons shichimi, plus extra to serve

2 tablespoons ground black pepper

¼ tablespoon potato starch

To serve

flaked sea salt

big dollop of kimchi mayonnaise

spicy shiso ponzu

red and green chillies, chopped, optional

lemon wedges

ice-cold sake, some wet shots and some frosty beer

Cut the chicken into 10 pieces: each breast into 2, remove the wings (hopefully you have 2 of these), remove and then separate the drumsticks and thigh meat.

Heat the master stock to 85°C/185°F in a large pan and plonk your chicken pieces in. Maintain the temperature and cook for 25 minutes. Take off the heat and cool the chicken in the stock to room temperature, and then remove the chicken and refrigerate, covered in clingfilm. You can store the master stock in the fridge or freeze for future use – just boil it before each use. The stock will keep for weeks and will get stronger every time it is boiled, just top it up with some water on each occasion and skim any scum off the surface.

Whip up the egg yolk and mix with it the cream and milk. Soak the chicken in this mix for 20 minutes.

To make the crunchy fry flour, mix all the ingredients well and store in a cool, dry place.

Now for the frying. Heat up the rapeseed oil in a large pan until it hits 180°C/350°F. Maintain this temperature.

Take the soaked chicken pieces and dip them into the crunchy fry flour – give them a really thorough rub, then toss about so that all the chicken pieces are well coated and there are no wet spots left.

Fry the chicken pieces immediately. Check the temperature of your oil once the chicken goes in. If the temperature rapidly reduces, give it some more heat so that it gets back to 180°C/350°F (if the chicken fries in oil that is lower in temperature than this, it will become soggy and oily). The frying takes about 2–2½ minutes, you want the chicken to look crunchy and golden. Carefully remove the chicken pieces when done, and drain on a wire rack.

To serve, grind half and half of the salt and shichimi around your serving dish – it’s great to dip the chicken in to. Get the chicken on the plate while it’s still hot and serve the kimchi mayo and spicy shiso ponzu on the side, scattered with the chillies and lemon wedges to squeeze. Scull down with some sake, beer or shots.



Fried Chicken Party